<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Gospel of St. John</title>
      <author><name reg="MacRory, Joseph">Joseph MacRory</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>July 19, 2014</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">46337</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
      <language id="ar"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2014-07-19">July 19, 2014</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Júlio Reis, Moisés S. Gomes, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Gospel of St. John</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">With Notes Critical and Explanatory</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By the</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Rev. Joseph MacRory, D.D.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Professor of Sacred Scripture and Hebrew, Maynooth College</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Ταῦτα δὲ γέγραπται, ἵνα πιστέυσητε ὅτι Ἰησοῦς ἐστιν ὁ Χριστὸς ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ
θεοῦ, καὶ ἵνα πιστεύοντες ζωὴν ἔχητε ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι αὐτοῦ.--St. John, xx. 31.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Browne &amp; Nolan, Limited</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Dublin</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1897</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<div>
  <p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/cover.jpg' rend='width: 30%'>
  <figDesc>Cover Art</figDesc>
  </figure>
  </p>
  <p>
  [Transcriber's Note: The above cover image was produced by the submitter at
  Distributed Proofreaders, and is being placed into the public domain.]
  </p>
</div>

<pb n='ii'/><anchor id='Pgii'/>

<div>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Nihil Obstat.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Gualterus MacDonald, D.D.</hi>,
</p>

<p>
Censor Theolog. Deputat.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Imprimatur.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Gulielmus,
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Archiep. Dublinen., Hiberniae Primas.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='iii'/><anchor id='Pgiii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
It may be well to state briefly the object and plan of the present
work. Some years ago their Lordships the Archbishops and
Bishops of Ireland decided to lengthen considerably the course
of Sacred Scripture read in this College. As a result of their
decision, all our students are now expected to read the whole
of the New Testament with the exception of the Apocalypse,
together with portions of the Old Testament. This change,
while it has the desirable advantage of familiarizing our students
with a larger portion of the Sacred Text, obviously renders it
impossible that so much time as formerly should be devoted to
the study of any one portion. The consequence of this is that
it is now impossible for any but the very ablest students to
find time to read the longer commentaries, such as those of
Maldonatus, Estius, and A Lapide. I was not long, therefore,
in charge of the Class of Sacred Scripture, when I became
convinced that it would be useful, if not necessary, to provide
the students with a more compendious exposition of the portions
of Scripture that they are expected to study.
</p>

<p>
With this object in view, I have not attempted, in the present
work, to give an exhaustive commentary on the Fourth Gospel.
Such an attempt, indeed, would have frustrated my object.
I have tried rather, while omitting nothing of importance, to
introduce nothing unnecessary, and to observe throughout the
utmost consistent brevity.
</p>

<p>
I am prepared to hear that some will consider I have passed
too lightly over the easier portions of the Gospel. I can only
say, in reply, that what I have done, has been done deliberately.
Where the meaning of God's word is sufficiently clear, I consider
that it ought to be left to the exercise of the student's intelligence
to find it, and I am strongly of opinion that in such
cases a commentator may well be excused from interposing his
remarks between the reader and the Sacred Text.
</p>

<p>
It might seem that the able and learned commentary of
Dr. MacEvilly&mdash;the only Catholic commentary hitherto existing
<pb n='iv'/><anchor id='Pgiv'/>
on this Gospel in the English language&mdash;would render such a
work as the present unnecessary. But the length of His Grace's
work, like the works of Maldonatus, Estius, and A Lapide,
renders it not wholly adapted to the present conditions of our
students. Besides, anyone acquainted with the work of a
professor will readily realize how important it is, and how
desirable, when possible, that students should possess in handy
and permanent form the professor's views. No two men will
think alike on all the difficult and intricate questions arising out
of the Gospel of St. John; and while I should feel it my duty, if
lecturing on the work of another, to impose upon the students
of my class the necessity of taking notes, I have hope that the
present work will to a large extent obviate such a necessity.
His Grace's work will, no doubt, continue to be used by many
of our students in preference to mine, and with all of them it
will still hold its place as a useful book of reference.
</p>

<p>
The Latin Text that I have followed is a reprint from the
Latin Vulgate published at Turin in 1883: <hi rend='italic'>Biblia Sacra Vulgatae
Editionis, Sixti V. Pontificis Maximi jussu recognita, et Clementis
VIII. auctoritate edita. Editio emendatissima, Indicis Congregationis
decreto probata, et iterum hoc anno evulgata. Augustae
Taurinorum, typis Hyacinthi Marietti</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>mdccclxxxiii</hi>. In only
one instance is there a conscious departure from this edition,
and that is in verses 3 and 4 of the first chapter, where I have
returned to the original punctuation of the Clementine Edition.
</p>

<p>
The English Text is from the Rhemish New Testament
approved by Cardinal Wiseman, and published by Burns and
Oates, Limited.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Maynooth College</hi>,<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Ascension Thursday, 1897</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Introduction.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I.&mdash;Authenticity Of The Fourth Gospel.</head>

<p>
That St. John the Apostle is
also an Evangelist, and author
of the fourth Gospel, has been
the all but unanimous testimony
of tradition. If we
except the Alogi (St. Epiph.,
<hi rend='italic'>Haer.</hi>, li. 3, 4), heretics of the
second century, who denied the
Johannine authorship, not on
historical, but on dogmatic
grounds, the authenticity of
the Gospel was unquestioned
down to the end of the eighteenth
century. Since that
time, however, it has been frequently
and variously attacked
by the so-called Rationalists,
whose many views in regard
to it may be reduced to one or
other of the three following
theories:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1. The patrons of what is
sometimes called the <q>partition
theory</q> hold that, though the
work as a whole cannot be said
to be St. John's, still considerable
portions of it are his.
About the extent of these portions
they differ. Weisse,
who, in the year 1838, first
gave prominence to this theory,
held that the discourses attributed
to Christ in the Gospel
are studies from the pen of
St. John, representing what he
considered to be the doctrine
of Christ; and that St. John's
disciples afterwards set these
discourses in their present historical
framework, and thus
produced the Gospel. Others,
however, admit that some portions
of the narrative, as well
as the discourses, are the work
of St. John.
</p>

<p>
2. The Gospel is in no part
the work of St. John; still the
historical portions contain
valuable traditions derived
from that Apostle. Renan,
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
who holds this view, says:&mdash;<q>The
fourth Gospel is not the
work of the Apostle John. It
was attributed to him by one
of his disciples, about the year
100. The discourses are
almost wholly fictitious; but
the narrative portions contain
valuable traditions, which reach
back in part to the Apostle
John.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vie de Jesus</hi>, ed. xiii., pp. 10, 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. This, like the preceding
theory, denies the Johannine
authorship; but it goes farther
than the preceding, in denying
to our Gospel any historical
value. According to this
theory, not only are the discourses
spurious, but the historical
portions are wholly
unreliable, and the Gospel was
forged in the latter half of the
second century. So Baur and
many others.
</p>

<p>
Against these various adversaries
there is abundant evidence,
external and internal,
in favour of the authenticity of
our Gospel.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A.&mdash;External Evidence.<note place='foot'>See Lamy, vol. ii., pp. 246-270; Cornely, Introd. iii., pp. 216-260.</note></head>

<p>
1. The <hi rend='bold'>Apostolic Fathers</hi>
do not, indeed, quote our
Gospel as the work of St. John,
for it was not their custom to
name the author from whom
they quoted; but passages
are met with in the works of
these fathers which are very probably
founded upon passages
in our Gospel. Compare, for
instance, with John xxi. 20, the
words of St. Clement of Rome
(† 101):&mdash;<q>John also, who
leaned upon the bosom of our
Lord, whom the Lord loved
exceedingly</q> (Epis. 1 <hi rend='italic'>De Virgin</hi>,
c. 6); or with John iii. 8, the
words of St. Ignatius of Antioch
(† 107):&mdash;<q>The Spirit, since
He is born of God, is not
deceived, <hi rend='italic'>for He knoweth
whence He cometh and
whither He goeth</hi></q> (Ad.
Philad. 7). It would be easy
to multiply instances of this
kind;<note place='foot'>See, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Cornely, iii., pp. 222, 223.</note> but, as such coincidences
are always more or less
inconclusive, it is more important
to note here that Papias
and Polycarp, two disciples
of St. John, indirectly support
the claim of the fourth Gospel
to authenticity. For it is
certain that both these writers
accepted the First Epistle of
St. John as his.<note place='foot'>Eusebius, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi>, iii. 39.</note> Now, so
great is the similarity of style
between our Gospel and that
Epistle, and so close the relation
between the two, that we
are justified in concluding,
with Cornely (Introd. iii. 59,
3), that Papias and Polycarp,
admitting the one, probably
admitted also the other to be
the work of St. John. Even
Renan admits that <q>The two
writings offer the most complete
identity of style, the
same terms, the same favourite
expressions.</q> Indeed we have
now the direct testimony of
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
Papias in a fragment of his
rather recently discovered:
<q>Quant au silence de Papias il
n'est plus possible d'en tirer
un argument contre le quatrième
Evangile. Un nouveau
fragment de l'évêque d'Hieropolis,
cité par Thomasius (i.
344) ... temoigne qu'il connaissait
l'œuvre de l'Apotre</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Didon&mdash;Jesus Christ</hi>, Introd.
xxviii.).
</p>

<p>
2. The <hi rend='bold'>Fathers of the
second century</hi> were thoroughly
acquainted with our
Gospel, and some of them
refer to it as the work of
St. John. Thus, when <hi rend='bold'>Justin
Martyr</hi> († 167), in proving the
necessity of Baptism (<hi rend='italic'>Apol.</hi> i.
61), says: <q>For Christ said:
<q>Unless you be born again,
you shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven.</q> Now
that those born once cannot
enter again into the wombs of
their mothers, is clear to all,</q>
there can hardly be a doubt
that he had before his mind
John iii. 3, 4.
</p>

<p>
Again, <hi rend='bold'>Tatian</hi>, a disciple of
St. Justin, actually wrote a
Harmony of the Four Gospels,
known as Tatian's <hi rend='italic'>Diatessaron</hi>,
which commenced with the
opening words of our Gospel:
<q>In the beginning was the
Word.</q><note place='foot'>St. Ephrem († 373) wrote a Commentary, in Syriac, on the <hi rend='italic'>Diatessaron</hi>,
and this Commentary is still extant in an Armenian translation, which is
probably as old as the fifth century.</note>
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='bold'>Muratorian Fragment</hi>,
which contains a list of canonical
books, made not later than
170 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, says: <q>John, one
of the disciples, (is the author)
of the fourth Gospel.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Theophilus</hi> of Antioch
(† 186), who was the sixth
successor to St. Peter in the
see of Antioch, says:&mdash;<q>These
things we are taught by the
Sacred Scriptures, and by all
inspired by the Holy Ghost, <emph>of
whom John says</emph>: <q>In the beginning
was the Word,</q></q> &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Finally, <hi rend='bold'>Irenæus</hi> († 202),
who was Bishop of Lyons in
Gaul, from about the year 180,
and who wrote his work,
<hi rend='italic'>Against Heresies</hi>, probably
between 180 and 190 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>,
says:&mdash;<q>Afterwards John, a
disciple of the Lord, who
reclined upon His breast, also
wrote a Gospel.</q> This testimony
of Irenæus is of very
special importance; for, besides
being a native of Asia
Minor, and a bishop in Gaul,
and thus representing in himself
the traditions of both
countries, he was moreover a
disciple of Polycarp, who was
himself a disciple of St. John,
so that no one had better
opportunities than Irenæus of
learning everything connected
with the Apostle.
</p>

<p>
Indeed, so well was our
Gospel known, and its authority
recognised in the second
century, that even the heretics
of the time sought the sanction
of its authority for their errors.
<q>They use that which is
according to John,</q> says
Irenæus, speaking of the
Valentinian heretics of the
second century (Iren., <hi rend='italic'>Haer.</hi>,
iii. 11. 7).
</p>

<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>

<p>
3. We abstain from quoting
Fathers of the <hi rend='bold'>third century</hi>,
because it is not denied that
they knew our Gospel, and
acknowledged St. John to be
the author. Even Strauss
(<hi rend='italic'>Leben Jesu</hi>, § 10, p. 47) says:
<q>It is certain that towards
the end of the second century,
the same four Gospels which
we have still, are found recognised
in the Church, and
are repeatedly quoted as the
writings of the Apostles, and
disciples of the Apostles, whose
names they bear, by the three
most eminent ecclesiastical
teachers&mdash;Irenæus, in Gaul;
Clement, in Alexandria; and
Tertullian, in Carthage.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is undeniable then that
before the close of the second
century, the fourth Gospel was
everywhere in the Church
received as the genuine work
of St. John. This, we hold,
proves that it must be indeed
his work. For he lived on till
the end of the first century;
his disciples till the middle,
and their disciples till the end,
of the second century. Is it
possible then that a spurious
work, produced by some forger
in the second century, could
have been everywhere so soon
received and recognised as the
work of the Apostle?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B.&mdash;Internal Evidence.</head>

<p>
1. The author himself tells
us (xxi. 20, 24), that he is <q>the
disciple whom Jesus loved, who
also leaned on His breast at
supper.</q> Now according to all
the fathers, <q>the disciple whom
Jesus loved,</q> &amp;c., was St. John.
Moreover, the three most
favoured disciples were Peter,
James, and John. They alone
were permitted to be present
at the raising to life of the
daughter of Jairus (Mark v. 37),
at the transfiguration (Matt.
xvii. 1), and at the agony in
the garden (Matt. xxvi. 37).
But Peter cannot be the writer
of our Gospel, from whom he
is explicitly distinguished (John
xxi. 20); nor James the Greater,
for, in the opinion of all, he
had been beheaded by Herod
Agrippa I. (Acts xii. 2) many
years before our Gospel was
written. It remains then that
the writer must be St. John.
Nor does this argument lose
its force, even though we admit
that the last two verses of our
Gospel (John xxi. 24, 25) were
not written by St. John. For
since they have stood in the
Gospel from the beginning,
they must at least be the evidence
of a contemporary; so
that we have here either an
internal argument or another
powerful external one in favour
of the Johannine authorship.
</p>

<anchor id='Intro_I_B_2'/>
<p>
2. While the Apostle John
plays an important part in the
other Gospels, he is not named
even once in the fourth Gospel.
If we had only it, we should
not know that there was an
Apostle of that name. The
fair inference then is, that he
himself being the writer, suppressed
his own name through
modesty. Moreover, while the
other Evangelists are accustomed,
when they speak of
John the Baptist, to distinguish
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
him from John the Apostle, our
author, again through modesty,
ignores the Apostle, and refers
nineteen different times to the
Baptist as John without any
distinguishing appellative.
</p>

<p>
3. The style is just such as
we should expect from St. John;
the Greek purer than that of
the other Gospels, because of
the author's long sojourn in
Asia Minor, yet not untinged
by Hebraisms because of his
earlier life spent in Palestine.
</p>

<p>
4. The whole Gospel points
to its author as one who was
intimately acquainted with
Palestine and its customs, and
who had lived and moved
among the events he describes.<note place='foot'>It is important to note this, because the Rationalist arguments against
the Johannine authorship prove nothing against St. John that they do not
prove also against all his contemporaries.</note>
Thus the journey from Cana
to Capharnaum is rightly
described as a <emph>descent</emph> (John
iv. 47, 51); the author is acquainted
with the pools of
Bethsaida and Siloe at Jerusalem
(John v. 2, ix. 7), with
the position of the brook of
Cedron in relation to Jerusalem
and the Mount of Olives (John
xviii. 1), and with the distance
of Bethany from the Holy City
(xi. 18).
</p>

<p>
Among Jewish customs he
refers to the manner of purification
before meals (John ii. 6),
and to their avoidance of intercourse
with Samaritans (iv. 9),
and hints at the objection of
their teachers to speak publicly
with women (John iv. 27). He
shows, too, that he is familiar,
not merely with Jewish festivals,
but also with their peculiar
solemnities (John vii. 2, 37),
and the time of their occurrence
(x. 22). Finally, he declares
himself an <emph>eye-witness</emph>, as
well where he says:&mdash;<q>The
Word was made flesh, and
dwelt among us, <hi rend='italic'>and we saw
His glory</hi></q> (John i. 14), as
where he tells us, <q>He <emph>that
saw it</emph>, hath given testimony
... and he knoweth that he
saith true</q> (John xix. 35).
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II.&mdash;Author.</head>

<p>
St. John, Apostle, Evangelist,
prophet, and martyr, was born
in Galilee, the son of Zebedee,
a fisherman of some means,
and Salome, one of those holy
women who ministered to our
Lord during His public life, and
stood by His cross on Calvary
(Mark i. 20; Matt. iv. 21,
xxvii. 56; Mark xv. 40, xvi. 1).
Before his call by Jesus, John
was probably a disciple of the
Baptist, and it is extremely
likely that he was one of the
two who at the preaching of
their Master first believed in
Christ (John i. 37, and foll.).
Called with his brother James,
immediately after Peter and
Andrew (Matt. iv. 18, 19, 21),
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
he left all things to follow
Christ, and became the best
beloved of all the disciples.
With Peter and his own brother
James he was permitted to
witness the raising to life of
the daughter of Jairus, and to
be present at the transfiguration
on Thabor, and the agony
in Gethsemane (Mark v. 27;
Matt. xvii. 1; Matt. xxvi. 37).
He was privileged to recline on
his Master's bosom at the Last
Supper (John xviii. 23), and
to him alone was given from
the cross the blessed trust of
providing for the Mother of
God (John xix. 27). Nor
did he fail to return love for
love. When the Apostles fled
in terror from Gethsemane
(Mark xiv. 50), Peter and John
followed Jesus into the court of
the High-priest (John xviii. 15);
and at the last tragic scene on
Calvary, our Evangelist, brave
with the courage begotten of
love, was still close to his
Master (John xix. 26).
</p>

<p>
After the descent of the Holy
Ghost, St. John, with St. Peter,
took a leading part in establishing
the Church. He and
Peter were the first to suffer
imprisonment for preaching the
faith of Christ (Acts iv. 2, 3);
and, again in company with
Peter, he was chosen to go
down from Jerusalem, and confer
the Sacrament of Confirmation
on the converted Samaritans.
How long he remained
in Palestine, we cannot say
with certainty. When St. Paul
went up to the Council of Jerusalem,
in 47 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>,<note place='foot'>See notes on chronology of the Acts.</note> he found
St. John there; but whether
our Apostle had himself gone
up specially to the Council,
or had hitherto confined his
preaching to Palestine, it seems
impossible to say, for St. Peter
was there too, though he had
been already Bishop of Antioch,
and was then Bishop of Rome.
</p>

<p>
In addition to the preceding
facts gleaned from the New
Testament, we learn from tradition
that the saint remained
in Jerusalem till after the
Blessed Virgin's death (Niceph.,
<hi rend='italic'>H. E.</hi>, ii. 42); that he subsequently
preached in Asia Minor,
and, probably after the martyrdom
of St. Paul (67 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>),
settled at Ephesus (Origen,
<hi rend='italic'>apud.</hi> Euseb., <hi rend='italic'>H. E.</hi>, iii. 1).
In the reign of Domitian (81-96
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) he was taken to Rome,
and thrown into a cauldron of
boiling oil, from which he came
forth unhurt (Tertull., <hi rend='italic'>De
Praescr.</hi> 36).<note place='foot'>St. Jerome, referring to this, writes: <q>Refert Tertullianus quod Romae
missus in ferventis olei dolium purior et vegetior exierit quam intraverit.</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Advers. Jovin</hi>, i. 26.)</note> He was then
banished to the island of
Patmos, in the Aegean Sea,
where he wrote the Apocalypse;
was liberated on the accession
of Nerva (96-98 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), and
allowed to return to Ephesus,
where he lived to an extreme
old age, and died in
the sixty-eighth year after
our Lord's Passion (Jer.,
<hi rend='italic'>Advers. Jovin</hi>, i. 14), <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
about 101 of the Dionysian
era.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Intro_III'/>
<head>III.&mdash;For Whom Written, And With What
Object.</head>

<p>
St. Jerome tells us that the
fourth Gospel was written for
the Christians of Asia Minor,
and at their request.<note place='foot'><q>Joannes quum esset in Asia, et jam tunc haereticorum semina pullularent
Cerinthi et Ebionis et ceterorum qui negant Christum in carne venisse
... coactus est ab omnibus tunc pene Asiae Episcopis et multarum ecclesiarum
legationibus de divinitate Salvatoris altius scribere.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Prol. in Matthew.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The object or scope of the
Gospel was threefold:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1. To prove that Jesus was
the Son of God made man, and
that all supernatural life must
come to us through faith in
His name. Hence he tells us in
the very beginning that <q>the
Word was God ... and the
Word was made flesh, and
dwelt amongst us</q> (John i. 14);
and in xx. 31: <q>But these are
written that you may believe
that Jesus is the Christ the Son
of God, and that believing you
may have life in His name.</q>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Intro_III_2'/>
2. As connected with the
preceding, indirectly to refute
the heresies of the Cerinthians,
Ebionites, and Nicolaites,<note place='foot'>Iren., <hi rend='italic'>Haer.</hi> iii. 1: <q>Joannes volens per evangelii annunciationem
auferre, eum qui a Cerintho inseminatus erat hominibus errorem et multo
prius ab his qui dicuntur Nicolaitae ... sic inchoavit evangelium.</q></note> all
of whom erred in regard to
either the Divinity or humanity
of Christ. See below <ref target='Chapter_IX'>IX.</ref>, and
Cornely, iii., † 64.
</p>

<p>
3. To supplement the three
Synoptic Gospels. So nearly
all the fathers. And, indeed,
it is perfectly evident that an
Evangelist who is entirely silent
regarding the birth, infancy,
and childhood of our Lord,
and who introduces Him
abruptly to the reader at the
beginning of His public life,
cannot have meant to write a
complete life of Christ. And
since St. John wrote many
years after the other Evangelists,
it is not surprising to find
that his work partakes more of
a supplemental character than
any of the Synoptic Gospels.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Intro_IV'/>
<head>IV.&mdash;Outline Of The Plan Of The Gospel.</head>

<p>
What has just been said
regarding the object of the
Gospel will enable us to form
a general conception of its
plan. It must be carefully
borne in mind that St. John
did not intend to write a Life
of Christ, nor to give a general
view of His teaching, nor to
compile a work on the general
history of his own times. His
main object was to prove that
Jesus of Nazareth was the Son
of God; and the various parts
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
of the Gospel are carefully
disposed with a view to this
end. Out of the vast mass
of materials at his disposal
(xxi. 25; xx. 30) he selects
such incidents, such miracles
and discourses of our Lord, as
are best suited to the attainment
of this special purpose.
In accordance with this view,
we subjoin a brief outline of
the <emph>plan</emph> of the Gospel.
</p>

<p>
I. 1-18.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>The Prologue.</hi> The Word
in His absolute, eternal Being;
in His relation to creation
generally, and to the spiritual
enlightenment and sanctification
of man; His incarnation.
</p>

<p>
I. 19-XXI. 23.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Narrative</hi>, which divides
itself naturally into two
parts:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) I. 19-XII. 50. Manifestation
of Christ's Divinity
in His <hi rend='italic'>Public Life</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<p>
By the testimony of the
Baptist.
</p>

<p>
By the testimony of His
disciples.
</p>

<p>
By the testimony of His
miracles.
</p>

<p>
By the testimony of His
discourses.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) XIII. 1-XXI. 23. Manifestation
of Christ's Divinity
in His last discourses, and in
His passion, death, resurrection,
and risen life.
</p>

<p>
XXI. 24, 25.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>The Epilogue</hi>, in which the
beloved disciple testifies that
he is the author of the Gospel,
and that what he has written
is true, though incomplete.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Intro_V'/>
<head>V.&mdash;Time And Place Of Writing.</head>

<p>
The exact date of our Gospel
is uncertain. One thing is
absolutely certain: that it was
written after the other three
Gospels. Some have placed it
almost as early as 70 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>; but
the weight of evidence, external
and internal, places it in the
last decade of the first century,
that is to say, between 90 and
100 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
</p>

<p>
There is great doubt, too,
as to the place where it was
written. Irenæus distinctly
states that it was written at
Ephesus,<note place='foot'><q>Joannes discipulus Domini ... et ipse edidit evangelium Ephesi
Asiae commorans.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Haer.</hi> iii. 1.</note> and many of the
fathers are of the same opinion.
On the other hand, a large
number of ancient writers hold,
that, like the Apocalypse, it
was written in Patmos. See
Patrizzi, lib. i., cap. iv., § 86,
who himself inclines to the
latter view.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Intro_VI'/>
<head>VI.&mdash;Integrity.</head>

<p>
With the exception of three
passages: v. 4, vii. 53-viii. 11,
and the whole of the last
chapter, which have been
attacked as interpolations,
the integrity of the fourth
Gospel has not been seriously
questioned. These passages
we shall examine as they
occur, and there discuss the
question of their authenticity.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>VII.&mdash;Language.</head>

<p>
It is certain that St. John
wrote in Greek. Such has
been the opinion of all
writers, and it is proved by
the fact that he wrote for
the Christians of Asia Minor,
whose language we know was
Greek.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>VIII.&mdash;Christ's Discourses In The Gospel.</head>

<p>
St. John's Gospel has this
peculiarity, that it is made up,
in great part, of Christ's discourses.
Judging from the
attention which the Evangelist
seems to pay to the order of
time, we feel sure that these
discourses are reported in the
chronological order in which
they were delivered.
</p>

<p>
But are they reported in the
very words used by Christ?
We feel convinced that they
are not. The important heads
of doctrine, such as iii. 3, 5,
bearing on baptism; or vi.
48, 52, regarding the Blessed
Eucharist, are, doubtless,
reported in almost<note place='foot'>Corluy, indeed, supposes the heads of doctrine to be reported in precisely
the exact words of our Lord: <q>Eas propositiones quae quasi capita doctrinae
apparent ... ad verbum referri admittendum putamus,</q> are his words.
But the fact that the words of institution of the Blessed Eucharist are
<emph>differently</emph> reported by the Synoptic Evangelists seems to us to refute this view.</note> the exact
words of our Lord. But the
discourses generally we believe
to be reported merely in substance.
For this was sufficient
for the Evangelist's
purpose; and, therefore, we
have no reason to suppose a
miraculous assistance which
would enable him to remember
every word. No doubt the
Evangelist had the assistance
of inspiration; but the Catholic
view of inspiration warrants
us in believing that in general
the ideas only, and not the
words, were inspired. We
thus get rid of the Rationalist
difficulty that the discourses
must be fictitious, because,
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
they say, no human memory
could retain such long discourses
for more than half a
century. For in our view it
is only the substance of the
discourses that is handed
down, and, even if we
abstracted altogether from the
assistance given him by inspiration,
it is not difficult
to believe that the young and
retentive mind of a loving
disciple would treasure up and
retain the substance of his
Divine Master's discourses,
aided as it must have been
by the fact that these discourses,
besides being the
food of his daily meditation,
were doubtless again and
again repeated in his apostolic
preaching.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Intro_IX'/>
<head>IX.&mdash;Errors Combated In The Gospel.</head>

<p>
There is not one of all the
many heresies that have arisen
regarding the Person and
natures of Jesus Christ that
may not be refuted from the
Gospel of St. John. We intend,
however, to speak here only of
those errors which had already
arisen in the time of the
Evangelist, and against which,
therefore, his Gospel was
immediately directed. What
these were we learn from
SS. Irenæus and Jerome. The
former distinctly says that our
Gospel was directed against
the errors of <hi rend='bold'>Cerinthus</hi>, and
of <q>those who are called
<hi rend='bold'>Nicolaites</hi></q> (see above, <ref target='Intro_III_2'>III. 2</ref>,
note); while the latter says
that it was directed against
<hi rend='bold'>Cerinthus</hi>, and <hi rend='bold'>other heretics,
especially the Ebionites</hi>.<note place='foot'><q>Joannes novissime omnium scripsit evangelium, rogatus ab Asiae
episcopis, adversus Cerinthum aliosque haereticos et maxime tunc Ebionitarum
dogma consurgens, qui asserunt Christum ante Mariam non fuisse.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Jer. de
Vir. Illust.</hi>, 9.</note>
It is important for us,
then, in approaching the study
of this Gospel to understand
what was the nature of these
errors against which it was
directed.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Cerinthus</hi>, though professing
belief in a Supreme
Being, held that the world was
not made by Him, but by an
inferior <emph>power</emph> (virtus) distinct
from Him, and ignorant of
Him. (2) That Jesus was not
born of a Virgin, but the child
of Joseph and Mary, born
according to the ordinary
course of nature. (3) That
Christ (the Word) was quite
distinct from Jesus; that,
however, He had descended
upon Jesus immediately after
the latter's baptism, and
remained with Him filling His
soul till shortly before the
Passion; that then Christ
departed from Jesus, who
suffered and died a <emph>mere</emph> man,
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
while Christ suffered nothing,
being indeed entirely spiritual
and impassible.<note place='foot'>The words of Irenæus are:&mdash;<q>Et Cerinthus autem quidam in Asia, non a
primo Deo factum esse mundum docuit, sed a Virtute quadam valde separata,
et distante ab ea principalitate, quae est super universa, et ignorante eum, qui
est super omnia, Deum. Jesum autem subjecit non ex Virgine natum
(impossibile enim hoc ei visum est); fuisse autem Joseph et Mariae filium
similiter ut reliqui omnes homines.... Et post baptismum descendisse
in eum ab ea principalitate quae est super omnia (ἐκ τῆς ὑπὲρ τὰ ὄλα
αὐθεντίας) Christum figura columbae, et tunc annuntiasse incognitum
Patrem, et virtutes perfecisse, in fine autem revolasse iterum Christum de Jesu,
et Jesum passum esse et resurrexisse, Christum autem impassibilem perseverasse,
existentem spiritalem.</q>&mdash;Iren., <hi rend='italic'>Adv. Haer.</hi>, i. xxvi.</note>
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='bold'>Ebionites</hi>, unlike the
Cerinthians, admitted that the
world was created by God, but,
like them, denied that Christ
was anything but a mere man.
They scrupulously observed
the Mosaic Law, which they
held to be <emph>obligatory</emph>, by the
observance of which Jesus had
merited to be called Christ,
and through which every man
was able to become a Christ.<note place='foot'><q><hi rend='italic'>Ebionaei</hi> autem consentiunt quidem mundum ab eo, qui revera Deus
est, factum esse; quae autem ad Christum pertinent, consimiliter Cerintho
fabulantur. Moribus Judaicis utuntur secundum legem; quapropter et
Christum Dei vocatum esse Jesum, quum nemo ex reliquis observaret legem.
Etenim si quis alius fecisset quae in lege praescripta sunt, ille evasisset
Christus. Posse autem etiam ipsos, si similiter egerint, Christos evadere;
etenim illum quoque hominem aeque ac reliquos fuisse dicunt.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Philosophumena</hi>,
vii. 16, 3342 (Migne).</note>
</p>

<p>
About the doctrine of the
<hi rend='bold'>Nicolaites</hi>, which they claimed
to have derived from Nicolas
the Deacon (Acts vi. 5), we
know nothing definite; but it
is generally held that it was
akin to that of the Cerinthians
and Ebionites.
</p>

<p>
Among the <q>other heretics</q>
alluded to by St. Jerome in the
passage cited above were,
doubtless, the <hi rend='bold'>Simonians</hi>
(followers of Simon Magus,
Acts viii. 9, and foll.), and the
<hi rend='bold'>Docetae</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='bold'>Simonians</hi> agreed with
the Cerinthians in denying that
the world was made by God,
and that Jesus was God, and
St. Irenæus speaks of them
as the originators of the
Gnostic heresy. <q>Simoniani
a quibus <emph>falsi nominis scientia</emph>
accepit initia.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Adv. Haer.</hi>,
i. xxxiii. 4.)
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='bold'>Docetae</hi> (δοκεῖν = to
seem) held that Christ had
only the <emph>appearance</emph> of a human
body; and hence, that His
sufferings and death were not
real, but apparent.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-18. <hi rend='bold'>The prologue<note place='foot'>Referring to this sublime prologue, St. Augustine says: <q>Ceteri tres evangelistae
tanquam cum homine Domino in terra ambulant, et de divinitate ejus
pauca dixerunt, istum autem quasi piguerit in terra ambulare, sicut in ipso
exordio sui sermonis intonuit, erexit se non solum super terram et super omnem
ambitum aeris et coeli, sed super omnem etiam exercitum angelorum, omnemque
constitutionem invisibilium potestatum; et pervenit ad eum per quem
facta sunt omnia, dicendo: <q>In principio erat verbum.</q> Huic <emph>tantae sublimitati
principii</emph> etiam caetera congrua praedicavit,</q> etc.&mdash;Tract 36 on St. John.</note> declares the Word's eternity, distinct personality,
and essential unity with God; His relations with creation
generally, and with man in particular; His incarnation, and
the fulness of grace, and perfection of revelation attained
through Him.</hi>
</p>

<p>
19-34. <hi rend='bold'>Some of the Baptist's testimonies to Christ.</hi>
</p>

<p>
35-51. <hi rend='bold'>Circumstances in which Christ's first disciples were called.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. In principio erat Verbum, et Verbum erat apud Deum, et Deus erat Verbum.</cell>
<cell>1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. <hi rend='bold'>In the beginning.</hi> These
words most probably mean
here, as in Gen. i. 1, at the
beginning of all created things;
in other words, when time
began. Their meaning must
always be determined from the
context. Thus we know from
the context in Acts xi. 15, that
St. Peter there uses them in
reference to the beginning of
the Gospel. Similarly, the
context here determines the
reference to be to the beginning
of creation; for He who is here
said to have been in the beginning,
is declared in verse 3 to be
the creator of all things, and
must therefore have already
been in existence at their
beginning.
</p>

<p>
Others, however, have interpreted
the words differently.
Many of the fathers understood
them to mean: in the Father,
and took this first clause of
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
v. 1, as a declaration that the
Word was in the Father. But,
though it is quite true to say
that the Word was and is in
the Father (x. 38), both being
consubstantial, still such does
not seem to be the sense of the
phrase before us. Had St.
John meant to state this, surely
he would have written: In
God, or, in the Father, was the
Word. He names God in the
next two clauses: <hi rend='italic'>And the
Word was with God, and the
Word was God</hi>. Why then
should he at the risk of being
misunderstood, refer to Him in
this first clause under another
name? Besides, if this first
clause stated the Word's consubstantiality
with the Father,
the third clause: <hi rend='italic'>And the
Word was God</hi>, would then
be tautological.
</p>

<p>
Many of the commentators
also urge against this view,
that if the first clause meant,
in God (or, in the Father)
was the Word, the <emph>second</emph>
clause would be merely
a repetition. But we cannot
assent to this, since, as we shall
see, the second clause would
add the important statement
of the Word's distinct personality.
However, the view
seems to us improbable for the
other reasons already stated.
</p>

<p>
Others take <q>beginning</q>
here to mean eternity, so that
we should have in this first
clause a <emph>direct</emph> statement of the
Word's eternity. But against
this is the fact that ἀρχη
(beginning) nowhere else bears
this meaning, and can be satisfactorily
explained in a different
sense here. Hence, as already
explained, <q>in the beginning</q>
means: when time began.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Was</hi> (ἦν), <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, was <emph>already</emph>
in existence. Had St. John
meant to declare that at the
dawn of creation the Word
began to exist, he would have
used ἐγένετο as he does in
verse 3 regarding the beginning
of the world, and again in
verse 6 regarding the coming
of the Baptist. This cannot
fail to be clear to anyone who
contrasts verses 1, 2, 4, and 9
of this chapter with verses 3,
6, and 14. In the former ἦν
is used throughout in reference
to the eternal existence of the
Word;<note place='foot'>Compare also 1 John i. 1, where our Vulgate should have translated by
<q>erat</q> instead of <q>fuit.</q></note> in the latter ἐγένετο,
when there is question of the
beginning of created things (3),
or of the coming of the Baptist
(6), or of the assumption by the
Word of human nature at the
incarnation (14). At the beginning
of creation, then, the
Word was already in existence;
and hence it follows that He
must be uncreated, and therefore
eternal. St. John's statement
here that the Word was
already in existence in the
beginning, is, accordingly,
equivalent to our Lord's claim
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
to have existed <emph>before</emph> the
world was (xvii. 5), and in
both instances the Word's
eternity, though not directly
stated, follows immediately.
Hence we find that the Council
of Nice and the fathers generally
inferred, against the
Arians, the eternity of the Son
of God from this first clause of
verse 1. <q>If He was in the
beginning,</q> says St. Basil (<hi rend='italic'>De
Div.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Hom.</hi> xvi. 82), <q>when
was He not?</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>The Word</hi> (ὁ λόγος). St. John
here, as well as in his First
Epistle (i. 1), and in the
Apocalypse (xix. 13), designates
by this term the Second
Divine Person. That he speaks
of no mere abstraction, or
attribute of God, but of a Being
who is a distinct Divine Person,
is clear. For this <q>Word was
with God, was God, was made
flesh, and dwelt amongst us,</q>
and in the person of Jesus
Christ was witnessed to by the
Baptist (i. 1, 14, 15, 29, 30).
Outside the writings of St. John
there is no <emph>clear</emph><note place='foot'>According to many, Heb. iv. 12 affords another instance in the New
Testament.</note> instance in
either Old or New Testament
of this use of the term λόγος.
Throughout the rest of the
Scriptures its usual meaning
is <emph>speech</emph> or <emph>word</emph>.
</p>

<p>
What, then, we may ask,
led our Evangelist, in the
beginning of his Gospel, to
apply this term rather than Son,
or Son of God, to the Second
Divine Person? Why did he
not say: In the beginning was
the Son?
</p>

<p>
Apart from inspiration,
which, of course, may have
extended to the suggestion of
an important word like the
present, apart also from the
appropriateness of the term, of
which we shall speak in a
moment, it seems very probable
that St. John was impelled
to use the term λόγος because
it had been already used by the
heretics of the time in the
expression of their errors.<note place='foot'><q>Huic nomini seligendo occasionem forte dederunt tunc jam grassantes
doctrinae Gnosticorum, qui ita post Philonem vocabant ens aliquod sublimius
quod dicebant Jesu fuisse unitum. Sic etiam nomina ἀρχή, ζωή, χάρις, ἀλήθεια,
μονογενής, a Gnosticis tribuuntur aeonibus suis, quae omnia Joannes in suo
prologo sensu genuino exponit.</q>&mdash;Corl., <hi rend='italic'>Comm. in S. Joan.</hi>, Quaer. 3, p. 26.</note>
Endowed, too, as St. John was,
like the other Apostles, with a
special power of understanding
the Sacred Scriptures (Luke
xxiv. 46), and privileged as he
had been on many an occasion
to listen to the commentaries
of Christ Himself on the Old
Testament, he may have been
able, where we are not, to see
clearly in the Old Testament
instances in which λόγος refers
to the Son of God; <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, <q>Verbo
(τῷ λόγῳ) Domini coeli firmati
sunt</q> (Psalm xxxii. 6).
</p>

<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>

<p>
One thing, at all events, is
quite plain, that, whatever may
be said regarding his reason
for the application of this <emph>term</emph>
to the Son of God, St. John did
not borrow his <emph>doctrine</emph> regarding
the λόγος from Plato
or Philo or the Alexandrian
School. For though the term
(λόγος) is frequently met with
in the writings of both Plato
and Philo, yet Plato never
speaks of it as a person, but
only as an attribute of God;
and Philo, though in our opinion,
he held the distinct personality
of the Word, yet denied
that he was God, or the creator
of matter, which latter Philo
held to be eternal. As to the
Alexandrian School, to which
Philo belonged, and of whose
doctrines he is the earliest
witness, there is not a shadow
of foundation for saying that
any of its doctors held the same
doctrine as St. John regarding
the Divine Word.
</p>

<p>
From the teaching of Christ,
then, or by inspiration, or in
both ways, our Evangelist received
the sublime doctrine regarding
the λόγος with which
his Gospel opens.
</p>

<p>
Having now inquired into
the origin of the term λόγος
as applied to the Son of God,
and having learned the source
whence St. John derived his
doctrine regarding this Divine
Word, let us try to understand
how it is that the Son of God
could be appropriately referred
to as <hi rend='bold'>the Word</hi> (ὁ λόγος). Many
answers have been given, but
we will confine ourselves to the
one that seems to us most
satisfactory.
</p>

<p>
We believe, and profess in
the Athanasian Creed (Filius a
Patre solo est non factus, nec
creatus, sed <emph>genitus</emph>), that the
Son is begotten by the Father;
and it is the common teaching
that He is begotten through
the Divine intellect. Now,
this mysterious procession of
the Son from the Father through
the intellect, is implied here in
His being called the Word.
For, as our word follows, without
passion or carnal feeling,
from our thought, as it is the
reflex of our thought, from
which it detracts nothing,
and which it faithfully represents;
so, only in an infinitely
more perfect way, the Son of
God proceeded, without passion
or any carnal imperfection,
through the intellect of the
Father, detracting nothing from
Him who begot Him, being
the image of the Father, <q>the
figure of His substance.</q> (Heb.
i. 3.) <q>Verbum proprie dictum,</q>
says St. Thomas, <q>in Divinis
personaliter accipitur, et est
proprium nomen personae filii,
significat enim quamdam emanationem
intellectus. Persona
autem quae procedit in Divinis
secundum emanationem intellectus,
dicitur filius, et hujusmodi
processio dicitur generatio</q>
(St. Thom., 1 Qu. 34, a. 2 c.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And the Word was with
God</hi> (πρὸς τὸν Θεόν). Πρός here
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
signifies not motion towards,
but a living union with, God.<note place='foot'>Sometimes (with πρός) the import of the accusative is apparently lost, πρός
signifying <emph>with</emph>, particularly in connection with names of persons (John i. 1);
but here πρός indicates (ideal) <emph>annexation</emph>, implying rather the active notion of
intercourse than a mere passive idea.&mdash;Winer, Gr. <hi rend='italic'>Gram. N. T.</hi>, 8th Eng. ed.,
p. 504, h. and note 4.</note>
God refers not to the Divine
Nature, but to the Divine
Person of the Father (see 1
John i. 2); otherwise the
<emph>Verbum</emph> would be unnecessarily
and absurdly said here to be
with Himself, since He is the
Divine Nature terminated in
the Second Person. Many commentators
are of opinion that
the use of πρός (with), and not
ἐν (in), proves that the <emph>Verbum</emph>
is not a mere attribute of
the Father, but a distinct
Person. So Chrys., Cyril,
Theophy., A Lap., Patrizzi,
M'Evilly.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And the Word was God.</hi>
As our English version indicates,
<hi rend='bold'>Word</hi> is the subject of
this clause, God the predicate,
for in the Greek λόγος has the
article, Θεός wants it; and besides,
as appears from the
whole context, St. John is
declaring what the Word is,
not what God is. A desire to
begin this clause with the last
word of the clause preceding&mdash;a
favourite construction with
St. John (see verses 4 and 5)&mdash;may
have led to the inversion
in the original. Or the inversion
may have been intended
to throw the Divinity of the
Word into greater prominence
by placing the predicate before
the verb.
</p>

<p>
Some, like Corluy, refer <hi rend='bold'>God</hi>,
in this third clause, to the
Divine Nature, which is common
to the three Divine
Persons; others, as Patrizzi,
to the Divine Nature as terminated
in the Second Divine
Person. We prefer the latter
view, but in either interpretation
we have in this clause a declaration
of the Divinity of the
Word, a proof that cannot be
gainsaid of His essential unity
with the Father. Nor does the
absence of the Greek article
before <q>God</q> in this third
clause, when taken in conjunction
with its presence in the
second, imply, as the Arians
held, that the Word is inferior
to the Father. For our Evangelist
certainly refers sometimes
to the supreme Deity
without using the article (i. 6,
12, 18); and the absence
of the article is sufficiently
accounted for in the present
case by the fact that Θεός is a
predicate standing before the
copula.<note place='foot'><q>The omission of the article before the predicate, when the predicate
stands before the copula is the usage of the New Testament.</q>&mdash;Alford, on this
verse.</note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. Hoc erat in principio apud Deum.</cell>
<cell>2. The same was in the beginning with God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. <hi rend='bold'>The same was in the
beginning with God</hi>. To
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
emphasize the three great
truths contained in verse 1:
namely, the Word's eternity,
His distinct personality, and
essential unity with the Father,
they are repeated in verse 2.
The same, that is, this Word
who is God, was in the beginning,
and was with God.
</p>

<p>
Various attempts have been
made by the Unitarians to
escape the invincible argument
for a Second Divine Person
which these opening verses of
our Gospel contain. Thus,
they put a full stop after the
last <q>erat</q> of verse 1; and,
taking the words in the order
in which they occur in the
Greek and Latin, make the
sense of the third clause:
<hi rend='italic'>And God was.</hi> Then they join
<q><hi rend='italic'>verbum</hi>,</q> the last word of
verse 1, with verse 2: This
Word was in the beginning
with God. But even if we
granted to the Unitarians this
punctuation of the verses, the
sense of the third clause would
still be that the Word was God,
and not that God existed. For
<q>Deus</q> (Θεός without the
article), in the beginning of the
third clause ought still to be
regarded as the predicate, with
<q>verbum</q> of the preceding
clauses as the subject. This
follows not merely from the
absence of the Greek article
already alluded to, but also
from the absurdity of the Unitarian
view, which supposes
that St. John thought it necessary,
after telling us that the
Word was with God, to tell us
that God existed!
</p>

<p>
Others have tried to explain
away the text thus: At the
beginning of the Christian dispensation
the Word existed,
and the Word was most intimately
united to God by love.
But, primum, they have still to explain
how this Word is declared
Creator in verses 3 and 10;
secundum, the statement in verse 14:
<q>And the Word was made flesh,</q>
implies transition of the Word
to a state different from that
in which He existed <q>in the
beginning;</q> but the time of
the transition is just the commencement
of the Christian
dispensation, which cannot,
therefore, be the time referred
to in verse 1 as <q>the beginning.</q>
</p>

<anchor id='I_3'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Omnia per ipsum facta sunt: et sine ipso
factum est nihil, quod factum est,</cell>
<cell>3. All things were made by him: and
without him was made nothing that was made.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. in ipso vita erat, et vita erat lux hominum:</cell>
<cell>4. In him was life, and the life was the light of men.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. St. John passes on to the
relations of the Word with
creatures. <hi rend='bold'>All things</hi> (πάντα = τὰ πάντα,
1 Cor. viii. 6, Col.
i. 16). The passages indicated,
as well as verse 10 of this
chapter: <hi rend='italic'>the world was made
by Him</hi>, make it clear that the
Son of God created all things.
Nor could this doctrine be
more plainly stated than in the
words before us: <hi rend='italic'>All things
were made by Him</hi>, &amp;c. How
absurd, then, is the Socinian
view, according to which
St. John merely tells us here
that all Christian virtues were
introduced, and the whole
<emph>moral</emph> world established by
Christ!
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Were made</hi> ἐγένετο, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
got their whole <emph>being</emph> from
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
Him, and not merely were
fashioned by Him from pre-existing
matter. The Cerinthian
theory, that the world
was made by an inferior being,
is here rejected. <hi rend='bold'>By Him</hi>
(δι᾽ αὐτοῦ). We are not to
suppose that the Word was an
instrument in the hands of the
Father, or inferior to the
Father, as the Arians held.
The preposition διά (per) is
often used in reference to a
principal efficient cause. Thus,
St. Paul says of the Father:
God is faithful, <emph>by whom</emph>
(δι᾽ οὗ) you are called unto
the fellowship of His Son,
Jesus Christ, our Lord (1 Cor.
i. 9. See also 1 Cor. i. 1,
2 Cor. i. 1, Gal. iv. 27, Heb.
ii. 10.) And since our Evangelist
has just declared in verse
1 the Word's divinity, and
knew Him to be one with the
Father (x. 30), it cannot be
implied here that the Word
is inferior to the Father. Some
commentators hold that there
is no special significance in the
use here of the preposition
διά, while others see in it an
allusion to the fact that the
Son proceeds from the Father,
and derives from Him His
creative power. According to
these, creation is <emph>from</emph> the
Father, but <emph>through</emph> the Son,
because the Son has received
His creative power, together
with His essence, from the
Father and is not, therefore,
like the Father, <q>principium
sine principio.</q>
</p>

<p>
Others think that since all
things were created according
to the Divine idea, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, according
to the Divine and eternal
wisdom, and since the Word is
that wisdom, therefore all
things are rightly said to have
been created through the
Word. So St. Thomas on
this verse:&mdash;<q>Sic ergo Deus
nihil facit nisi per conceptum
sui intellectus, qui est sapientia
ab aeterno concepta, scilicet
Dei Verbum, et Dei Filius; et
ideo impossibile est quod aliquid
faciat nisi per Filium.</q>
In this view, which seems to us
the most probable, though like
all the Divine works that are
<q>ad extra,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> do not terminate
in God Himself, creation
is common to the Three Divine
Persons, yet, for the reason
indicated, it is rightly said to
be through the Son.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And without him was
made nothing</hi> (οὐδὲ ἕν = not
anything, emphatic for οὐδέν
nothing) <hi rend='bold'>that was made</hi> (Gr.:
hath been made). By a Hebrew
parallelism the same truth is
repeated negatively: all things
were made by Him, and
nothing was made without
Him. To this negative statement,
however, there is added,
according to the method of
pointing the passage common
at present, an additional clause
which gives us the meaning:
nothing was made without
Him, of all the things that
have been made. This restrictive
clause may then
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
be understood to imply that,
together with the Word, there
was something else uncreated,
that is to say (besides the
Father, whose uncreated existence
would be admitted by
all) the Holy Ghost also.
</p>

<p>
In this way after the Macedonian
heresy arose in the
middle of the fourth century,
and blasphemously held that
the Word had made the Holy
Ghost, because without Him
was made nothing, many of
the Fathers replied: Nothing
was made without the Word,
of the things that were made;
but the Holy Ghost was not
made at all, and is therefore
not included among the things
made by the Word. However,
this restriction is not necessary
to defend the Divinity of the
Holy Ghost. Even though we
understand it to be stated absolutely
that nothing was made
without the Son, no difficulty
can follow; for the Holy Ghost
was not <emph>made</emph> (ἐγένετο), but
<emph>was</emph> (ἦν) from all eternity, as
is clearly implied elsewhere.
John xvi. 13, 14.
</p>

<p>
On dogmatic grounds, therefore,
there is no necessity for
connecting: <hi rend='italic'>Quod factum est</hi>,
in the end of verse 3, with the
preceding. And, as a matter
of fact, all the writers of the
first three centuries seem to
have connected these words
with verse 4,<note place='foot'>See Patrizzi, iii. Diss. viii. 21.</note> and it appears
to us very likely, that it was
because of the Macedonian
heresy they began to be connected
with verse 3. St. Chrysostom
certainly is very strong
in connecting them with verse
3, but the reason is because
the heretics of the time were
abusing the other connection
to support their errors. <q>For
neither will we,</q> he says,
<q>put a full stop after that
<q>nothing,</q> as the heretics do</q>
(Chrysostom on John, Hom. v).
We must not, however, conclude,
from this remark of
St. Chrysostom that it was the
heretics alone who did so; for,
as we have said already, such
was the ordinary way of connecting
the clauses during the
first three centuries; and it is
supported not only by the
Fathers, but by the oldest
Latin MSS., and by some of
the oldest Greek MSS. And
even after the Macedonian
heretics had abused this passage
to blaspheme the Holy
Ghost, the old pointing, or to
speak more correctly the old
method of connecting the
clauses, remained the more
common.<note place='foot'>Patriz.</note> Not only did Cyril of
Alexandria, and Augustine, and
Venerable Bede, and St.
Thomas, and a host of others
read in this way, but Maldonatus,
who himself prefers the connection
in our English version:
<q>Without Him was made nothing
that was made,</q> admits
that the usage of his time was
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
against him, and that it was
then the practice to put a full
stop after <q>nothing</q>: <q>Without
Him was made nothing.</q>
Nor can the Sixtine or Clementine
edition of the Vulgate be
appealed to in favour of our
present pointing. As a matter
of fact, the Sixtine edition
<emph>rejected</emph> it, printing thus:
<q>Et sine ipso factum est nihil:
quod factum est in ipso vita
erat;</q> while the Clementine
Bible left the matter undecided
by printing thus: <q>Et sine
ipso factum est nihil, quod
factum est, in ipso vita erat,</q>
&amp;c. We cannot, therefore,
understand to what Roman
Bibles A Lapide refers when
he says that the Bibles corrected
at Rome connect thus:
<q>And without Him was made
nothing that was made.</q>
</p>

<p>
We think it extremely probable,
then, that the words:
Quod factum est (<hi rend='italic'>that was
made</hi>, or, as we shall render
in our interpretation; <hi rend='italic'>what
was made</hi>), standing at present
in the end of verse 3,
are to be connected with verse
4. Some may be inclined to
blame us for departing from
what is at present the received
connection of the words in
such a well-known passage
as this. Let us, therefore,
sum up briefly the evidence
that has forced us, we may
say reluctantly, to connect the
words with verse 4.
</p>

<p>
1. Though Maldonatus tries
to throw doubt upon the fact,
this is the connection adopted
by practically all, if not all, the
Fathers and other writers of
the first three centuries, and
by the majority of writers
afterwards down to the sixteenth
century.
</p>

<p>
2. It is supported by the
oldest MSS. of the Vulgate,
and, what is more remarkable,
by some of the oldest Greek
MSS., notwithstanding the
fact that St. Chrysostom was
against it.
</p>

<p>
3. The parallelism in the
verse is better brought out:
<hi rend='italic'>All things were made by Him,
and without Him was made
nothing.</hi>
</p>

<p>
4. If <hi rend='italic'>Quod factum est</hi> were
intended to be connected with
the preceding, the clause
would be certainly unnecessary,
and apparently useless, because
it is plain without it that the
Evangelist is speaking of what
was <emph>made</emph>, and not including
any uncreated Being, like the
Father or the Holy Ghost.
</p>

<p>
We prefer, then, to connect:
<hi rend='italic'>Quod factum est</hi>, with what
follows. But it still remains
for us to inquire in what way
precisely the connection is to
be made, for various views
have been held upon the
subject.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>A.</hi> Some connect thus: What
was made in (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> by) Him, was
life, and the life was the light of
men. <hi rend='bold'>B.</hi> Others thus: What
was made was life in Him,
and the life was the light
of men. <hi rend='bold'>C.</hi> Others again,
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
adopting the same punctuation
as in the preceding, but understanding
differently: What
was made in it was the Life,
and the Life was the Light of
men.
</p>

<p>
The last seems to us the
correct view. For <hi rend='bold'>A</hi> is improbable,
inasmuch as it either
declares all things to have
life, or implies that though
what was made by the Word
had life, yet there were other
things wanting life, which
proceeded, as the Manichaeans
held, from the evil principle.
</p>

<p>
Nor can we accept <hi rend='bold'>B</hi>, even
as explained by St. Augustine
in the sense that all created
things are in the mind of God,
as the house before building is
in the mind of the architect;
and that being in the mind of
God they are God Himself,
and <q>life in Him.</q> For though
this is in a certain sense true,
yet it seems to us unnatural to
suppose that St. John here, in
this sublime exordium, thinks
it necessary or useful to tell us
that the archetypes of created
things lived in the Divine
Mind. <hi rend='bold'>C</hi> then appears to us
to be the more probable
view regarding the passage:
<q>What was made, in it was
the Life;</q> or, more plainly:
<q>In that which was made was
the Life;</q> for here, as elsewhere,
St. John begins with the relative
(see <ref target='I_45'>i. 45</ref>, 1 John i. 1); so
that, in this view, the Evangelist
after telling us the relations
of the Word to all things at
their beginning: <q>All things
were made by Him, and without
Him was made nothing,</q> now
goes on to point out His relations
to them after their creation:
first, His relations with
things generally: <q>In that
which was made was the Life,</q>
then his relations with man in
the supernatural order: <q>And
the Life was the Light of men.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. Adopting this view as to
the connection between verses
3 and 4, St. Cyril of Alexandria
thus explains: <q>The Life (ἡ ζωή),
that is to say, the Only-begotten
Son of God, was in all things
that were made. For He, being
by nature life itself, imparts
being, and life, and motion to
the things that are ... In all
things that were made was the
Life, that is, the Word which
was in the beginning. The
Word, being essential life, was
mingling Himself by participation
with all existing things.</q>
</p>

<p>
If it be objected to this interpretation
that the first ζωή of
verse 4, not having the article,
cannot mean the Eternal Life,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the Divine Word, we reply
that St. Cyril, one of the
greatest of the Greek Fathers,
thought differently; and moreover,
that very many of the
commentators who are against
us in the interpretation of this
passage, are yet with us in
referring ζωή here to the uncreated
life of the Divine Word.
</p>

<p>
But if we follow what is at
present the common punctuation,
and read: <q>In Him was
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
life,</q> this is commonly interpreted
to mean that the Word is
the source of supernatural life
to man. S. Amb., S. Ath., Tol.,
Mald., A Lap., Patr., Beel.
</p>

<p>
But this view is not without
difficulty. For, first, if it be
merely meant that life comes
to man through the Word, we
might rather expect that the
preposition διά of the preceding
verse would have been retained.
</p>

<p>
Secondly, if there be question
here of the Word as the life of
<emph>man</emph>, how is it that it is only
in the next clause that man is
first mentioned? Surely, if the
opinion we are considering
were correct, we should rather
expect St. John to have written:
<q>In Him was the life of man,
and the life was the light.</q>
For these reasons, and because
of what we have stated already
in favour of connecting <q>Quod
factum est</q> with what follows,
we prefer to understand this
passage, with St. Cyril, as a
statement that the Word, the
Essential Life, was present in
all things, conserving them in
existence.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And the Life was the
Light of men.</hi> In our view
the meaning is that the Word,
the Life, who conserved all
things in existence, was, moreover,
in the case of men, their
Light&mdash;the source and author
of their faith. Hence, we suppose
St. John, after referring
to the creation of all things, in
verse 3, and the conservation
of all things, in the beginning
of verse 4, to pass on now in
the end of verse 4 to speak of
that new creation that is effected
in man by means of a spiritual
illumination: <q>All things were
made by (or through) Him, and
without Him was made nothing.
In that which was made was
the Life, and the Life was the
Light of men.</q>
</p>

<p>
Those who interpret the
beginning of the verse to mean
that the spiritual life of man
comes through the Word, take
the present clause as explaining
how that was so, how the
Word was the Life; namely,
inasmuch as He was the Light.
He was the source of our life
of grace here and glory hereafter,
inasmuch as He was the
source of our light, that is to
say, our faith. And some of
them, as Patrizzi, hold that the
order of the terms in this clause
is inverted, and that we should
read: <q>the light of men was
the life,</q> <q>light of men</q>
being the subject.
</p>

<p>
Maldonatus tells us that
almost all writers before his
time understood <q>light of
men</q> in reference to the light
of reason. However, this view
is now generally abandoned,
and rightly, for that man owed
his reason to the Word
has been already implied in
verse 3: <q>All things were
made by Him.</q> Besides, the
<q>light</q> of this fourth verse is
doubtless the same as that of
verse 5, which <hi rend='italic'>men did not
receive</hi>, and of verse 7, to
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
which the Baptist was to bear
witness. But in neither of the
latter verses can there be question
of the light of reason;
hence, neither is there in verse
4. The meaning, then, is that
He who was the preserver of
all things was moreover the
source of the <emph>spiritual</emph> light of
men.
</p>

<anchor id='I_5'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. Et lux in tenebris lucet,
et tenebrae eam non comprehenderunt.</cell>
<cell>5. And the light shineth in
darkness, and the darkness
did not comprehend it.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Fuit homo missus a Deo,
cui nomen erat Johannes.</cell>
<cell>6. There was a man sent
from God, whose name was
John.</cell></row></table>

<p>
5. <hi rend='bold'>And the light shineth.</hi>
The meaning is, that the
Word, as the source and
author of faith, was always,
as far as in Him lay, enlightening
men. <hi rend='bold'>Shineth</hi>&mdash;the
present tense is used,
though the latter part of the
verse shows that the past also
is meant: <q>The light shineth in
the darkness, and the darkness
<emph>did not</emph> comprehend it.</q> Probably
the Evangelist avoids
using the past tense, lest it
might be inferred that the
Word had ceased to shine.
Besides, the present is more
appropriate, seeing that, in the
sense explained, the Word
shines <emph>throughout all time</emph>.
From the beginning the Word
shone, as far as in Him lay.
If men generally were not
enlightened, it was their own
fault. But all who were saved
from the beginning, were saved
through faith, and no one ever
received the gift of faith except
in view of the merits of the
Word Incarnate. <q>Nulli
unquam contigit vita nisi per
lucem fidei, nulli lux fidei nisi
intuitu Christi</q> (St. August.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>The darkness</hi> is man
shrouded in unbelief. See
Luke i. 79, Eph. v. 8.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And the darkness did not
comprehend it.</hi><note place='foot'>The R. V. has <q>apprehended it not,</q> with marginal alternative:
<q>overcame it not.</q></note> As we have
just said, the meaning is,
that unbelieving men refused
to be enlightened. Ordinarily,
indeed, light cannot shine in
darkness without dispelling it;
but in this case the darkness
was man, a free agent, capable
of rejecting the light of faith
through which the Eternal
Word was shining. In telling
us that men refused to be
enlightened, the Evangelist is
stating what was the general
rule, to which at all times
there were noble exceptions.
</p>

<p>
6. The correct rendering of
the Greek text is: <hi rend='bold'>There
came</hi> (ἐγένετο) <hi rend='bold'>a man,
sent by God, whose name
was John</hi>. This reference to
the Baptist in the middle of
this sublime exordium is
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
surprising, and has been variously
accounted for. Some
think that our Evangelist,
after having treated of the
Divinity of the Word, merely
wishes, before going on to
speak of the incarnation, to
refer to the precursor. But it
seems most probable that the
Evangelist wished to remove
at once the error of those
who, impressed by the austerity
and sanctity of the
Baptist's life, had looked upon
him as the Messias. If any of
them still remained at the
time when St. John wrote, or
should arise afterwards, they
are here told that the Baptist,
though having his mission
from Heaven, was only a man
intended to bear witness to
Christ. Thus the superior
excellence of Christ is thrown
into relief from the fact that
a great saint like the Baptist
was specially sent by Heaven
to be His herald. The reference
in this verse is to the
Baptist's coming into the
world, at his conception,
rather than to the beginning
of his preaching, for at the
moment of his conception, he
came, sent by God to be the
herald of Christ. See Luke
i. 13-17.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>John</hi> is the same name
as Jochanan (וחנן), which is
itself a shortened form of
Jehochanan = Jehovah hath
had mercy. This name was
appointed for the Baptist,
before his conception, by
the Archangel Gabriel, Luke
i. 13.
</p>

<anchor id='I_7'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Hic venit in testimonium,
ut testimonium perhiberet de
lumine, ut omnes crederent
per illum:</cell>
<cell>7. This man came for a
witness, to give testimony of
the light, that all men might
believe through him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Non erat ille lux, sed ut
testimonium perhiberet de
lumine.</cell>
<cell>8. He was not the light, but
was to give testimony of the
light.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Erat lux vera, quae illuminat
omnem hominem venientem
in hunc mundum</cell>
<cell>9. That was the true light,
which enlighteneth every man
that cometh into this world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. This man came for witness,
namely, in order that he
might bear witness of <hi rend='italic'>the light</hi>,
that is to say, the Incarnate
Word, to the end that through
him all might believe in the
Word.
</p>

<p>
8. <hi rend='bold'>He was not the light</hi>
(τὸ φῶς), that is, he was not the
great uncreated light which
enlighteneth all men; though,
in his own way, the Baptist
too was a light, nay, as Christ
Himself testified <q>the lamp
that burneth and shineth.</q>
(v. 35). Ἵνα depends on ἦλθεν (he
came), which is to be understood
from the preceding verse.
</p>

<p>
9. <hi rend='bold'>That was the true light</hi>
(or, there was the true light),
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
<hi rend='bold'>which enlighteneth every
man that cometh into this
world</hi>. The Greek of this
verse may be construed and
translated in three different
ways:&mdash;1. By connecting ἦν
with ἐρχόμενον: The true light,
which enlighteneth every man,
was coming into this world.
2. By taking ἐρχόμενον as a
nominative agreeing with φῶς:
There was the true light which
<hi rend='italic'>at its coming</hi> into the world,
enlighteneth every man (iii. 19.)
3. By connecting ἐρχόμενον
with ἄνθρωπον, as in the Vulgate
and our English version. This
is far the most probable view.
In favour of it we have all the
Latin Fathers, all the Greek
Fathers except one, and all
the ancient versions. Besides,
ἐρχόμενον is thus connected
with the nearest substantive
with which it agrees in form.
Add to this that the second
opinion, the more probable of
the other two, would seem to
signify that the Word was not
a light to all men before
His coming, but only at His
coming; and this, as we have
explained above on verse 5, is
false. The meaning, then, is
that the Word was the true,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the perfect light, and as
far as in Him lies enlighteneth
at all times every man that
cometh into this world, be he
Jew or Gentile. <hi rend='bold'>That cometh
into this world</hi>, is in our view
a Hebrew form of expression
equivalent to: that is born.
It is used only here in the New
Testament, but <q>to be born</q>
was commonly expressed by
Jewish Rabbins by בוא בעולס (to
come into the world).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>10. In mundo erat et mundus
per ipsum factus est, et mundus
eum non cognovit.</cell>
<cell>10. He was in the world, and
the world was made by him,
and the world knew him not.</cell></row></table>

<p>
10. <hi rend='bold'>He was in the world.</hi>
The Word, not the light, is
the subject here, as is proved
by the masculine pronoun
αὐτόν towards the end of the
verse. It is disputed to what
presence of the Word in the
world there is reference here.
Almost all the Fathers understood
the reference to be to
the presence of the Word in
the world before the incarnation.
According to this
view, which is held also by
A Lapide, the Word was in the
world, in the universe, conserving
what He had created,
<q>sustaining all things by the
word of His power</q> (Heb. i. 3).
God is everywhere present by
His essence, by His knowledge,
and by His power; but
it is of the latter presence,
which could be known, that
the view we are considering
understands this clause.
</p>

<p>
Maldonatus, though he admits
that the Fathers are
against him, holds that the
reference is to the mortal life
of the Word Incarnate. He
argues from the fact that the
world is blamed, in the next
clause, for not having known
the Word; but knowledge
of the Word was impossible
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
before the incarnation. It was
possible indeed to know there
was a God, but impossible to
know the Second Divine Person,
the Word. Whatever may be
thought of the probability of
this second view, the arguments
ordinarily adduced
against it, from the use of the
imperfect <q>erat</q> (ἦν) and from
the alleged fact that all the preceding
verses refer to the Word
before His incarnation, have
no weight. For the imperfect
may be used not in reference
to Christ's existence before
His incarnation, but to show
that He not merely appeared
among men, but <emph>continued</emph> to
dwell for a time among them;
and the statement that everything
before this verse refers
to the Word before His incarnation,
cannot be sustained.
For the <q>Light</q> to which the
Baptist came to bear witness
(v. 7) was not the Word before
His incarnation, but the Word
Incarnate, as is evident.
According to this second
opinion, verse 11: He came
unto His own, and His own
received Him not, merely
emphasizes the ingratitude of
the world towards the incarnate
Word by showing that
He was rejected even by His
own chosen people.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And the world was made
by him, and the world
knew him not.</hi> Those who
interpret the first clause of
this verse of the existence
of the Word in the world
before the incarnation, understand
the world to be blamed,
in the remainder of the
verse, for its ignorance of
its Creator. The world is not
blamed, they say, for not
knowing the Word as the
Second Divine Person, for
such knowledge it could not
have gathered from the works
of creation, but for not knowing
God (Rom. i. 20), who
is one in nature with the
Word.
</p>

<p>
Those who interpret the first
part of the verse of the presence
of Christ on earth during His
mortal life, hold that in the
remainder the world is blamed
for not recognising the Word
Incarnate as the Son of God,
and Second Divine Person.
The meaning of the whole verse
then, in this view, is: that
though the Son of God, who
created the world, deigned
to live among men, yet they
refused to recognise Him as
God.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. In propria venit, et sui
eum non receperunt.</cell>
<cell>11. He came unto his own,
and his own received him not.</cell></row></table>

<p>
11. <hi rend='bold'>He came unto his own.</hi>
It is clear from what we have
said on the preceding verse,
that some take this to be the
first reference to the presence
on earth of the Word Incarnate;
while others regard it as
merely repeating the idea of
the preceding verse, with the
additional circumstance that
even <hi rend='italic'>His own</hi> refused to recognise
Christ. Some few
have held that the reference
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
here is to the transient coming
of the Word in the apparitions
of the Old Testament. But
all the Fathers understood the
verse of the coming of the
Word as man, and the verses
that follow prove their view to
be correct. <hi rend='bold'>His own</hi> is understood
by many of His own
world, which He had created;
but we prefer to take it as
referring to His own chosen
people, the Jews. <q>Verbum
inter Judæos veniens, natumque
ex gente Judæorum, quos
sibi Deus elegerat in populum
peculiarem (Deut. xiv. 2)
percommode dicitur venisse εἰς
τὰ ἴδια atque ipsi Judaei Verbo
ἴδιοι esse dicuntur,</q> Patriz.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And his own received
him not.</hi> That is to say, believed
not in Him, but rejected
Him. This was the general
rule, to which, of course, there
were exceptions, as the following
verse shows. These words
together with the two following
verses, we take to be a parenthetic
reflexion on the reception
Christ met with, and the happy
consequences to some.
</p>

<anchor id='I_12'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Quotquot autem receperunt
eum, dedit eis potestatem
filios Dei fieri, his qui credunt
in nomine eius.</cell>
<cell>12. But as many as received
him, he gave them power to
be made the sons of God, to
them that believe in his name.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13. Qui non ex sanguinibus,
neque ex voluntate carnis
neque ex voluntate viri, sed ex
Deo nati sunt.</cell>
<cell>13. Who are born, not of
blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man,
but of God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
12. There were some, however,
who believed in Him, or,
according to the Hebraism,
in His name, and to these,
<emph>whether Jews or Gentiles</emph>,
He gave power to become
adopted children of God.
That is to say, after they had
co-operated with His grace
and believed, He mercifully
gave them further grace
whereby they could be justified,
and thus be God's adopted
children. The last words of
this verse: <hi rend='bold'>To them that
believe in His name</hi>, explain
what is meant in the beginning
of the verse by receiving Him.
</p>

<p>
13. Some commentators
have found great difficulty in
this verse, because they supposed
that those who in the
preceding verse are said to
have got the power to become
children of God are here said
to have been already born of
God. But the difficulty vanishes,
it seems to us, if
verse 13 be taken as explaining
not what those who believed
were before they became
sons of God, but the <emph>nature
of the filiation</emph>, to which those
who believed got power to
raise themselves. It is not
faith that makes them sons of
God, but through faith (not as
a meritorious cause, but as a
condition) they attained to
charity, which made them
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
children of God. This too is
all that is meant in 1 Jn. v. 1. It
is not meant that by believing
they are <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>eo ipso</foreign>, through faith
alone, sons of God. Faith, as
the Council of Trent lays down,
is the root of justification, but
it is not the formal nor even
the meritorious cause of justification;
it is a condition <q>sine
qua non.</q> And just as St. Paul
attributes justification to faith
without meaning that it is of
itself sufficient, so St. John
(1 John v. 1) attributes to faith
Divine sonship without meaning
that it comes from faith
alone. See Decrees of the
Council of Trent, Sess. vi.
Chap. vi. and viii. The meaning
of the two verses, according to
this view, is, that as many as
received Christ by believing in
Him, got power to become
children of God, children who
<emph>were</emph> born (ἐγεννήθησαν) not of
<emph>bloods</emph>,<note place='foot'><q>Pluralis adhibetur ratione habita utrusque parentis.</q>&mdash;Beel, <hi rend='italic'>Gr. Gram.</hi>
§ 273, note.</note> nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man,
but of God. Thus verse 13
explains that these sons of
God were born not in a carnal
but in a spiritual manner.
<q>Tria hic de generatione
humana sic exponit St.
Thomas: <emph>ex sanguinibus</emph>, ut
ex causa materiali; <emph>ex voluntate
carnis</emph>,<note place='foot'>St. Thomas seems to prefer St. Augustine's peculiar view, that the
woman is here meant by <q>caro.</q> The other opinion given above is given by
him only in the second place as an alternative.</note> ut ex causa efficiente
quantum ad concupiscentiam
(in qua est voluntas
sensitiva); <emph>ex voluntate viri</emph>,
ut ex causa efficiente intellectuali
(libere actum conjugalem
perficiente).</q> Corl.
</p>

<p>
To be born of God, implies
that we are transferred into a
new life wherein we become in
some sense partakers of the
Divine nature (2 Pet. i. 4).
Through the seed of Divine
grace we are begotten anew
and raised to this higher life.
</p>

<anchor id='I_14'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Et Verbum caro factum
est, et habitavit in nobis: et
vidimus gloriam eius, gloriam
quasi Unigeniti a Patre, plenum
gratiae et veritatis.</cell>
<cell>14. And the Word was
made flesh, and dwelt among
us (and we saw his glory, the
glory as it were of the only-begotten
of the Father) full of
grace and truth.</cell></row></table>

<p>
14. After the reflexion in
verses 12 and 13 on the way
Christ was received by men,
the Evangelist now states the
<emph>manner</emph> in which He came;
namely, by taking human
nature. According to some,
the first <q>and</q> is equivalent
to <q>for.</q> <q>After He had said
that those who received Him
are born of God and sons of
God, He adds the cause of this
unspeakable honour, namely,
that the Word was made flesh.</q>
(St. Chrys.). Others, however,
think that <q>and</q> has merely
its ordinary conjunctive force.
Note that Ὁ λόγος, not mentioned
since verse 1, is again
named, for emphasis, and to
put it beyond doubt or cavil
that it is the same Eternal God
of verse 1 who is declared to
have become man in verse 14.
<hi rend='bold'>Flesh</hi> is a Hebraism for
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
man. See also Gen. vi. 12;
Isai. xl. 5; Ps. lv. 5; John
xvii. 2. Probably it is used
here specially against the Docetae,
heretics who denied that
Christ had really taken flesh,
which they contended was essentially
polluted and corrupt.
</p>

<p>
<q>Docetae discernebant in
homine tria principia τὴν σάρκα,
τὴν ψυχήν, et τὸν νοῦν vel τὸ
πνεῦμα. Duo priora habebant
ut essentialiter polluta, cum
quibus ideo Verbum hypostatice
uniri non posset. St. Joannes
haec tria Verbi hypostasi fuisse
unita docet, τὴν σάρκα hoc loco;
τὴν ψυχήν, John xii. 27; τὸ
πνεῦμα, xi. 33; xiii. 21; xix.
30,</q> Corluy, p. 40, note.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And dwelt.</hi> Many think, with
St. Chrysostom and St. Cyril,
that the Greek verb used is
employed specially to indicate
that the Word did not cease to
be God when He became man,
but <emph>dwelt</emph> in His humanity as
in a tent among men.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And we saw.</hi> The Greek
verb signifies to behold with
attention. We beheld not
merely His human nature present
among us, but we beheld
His glory as in the transfiguration,
Matt. xvii. 1, and
ascension, Acts i. 9, 11. For
glory, the Greek word is δόξα,
the solemn Scriptural term for
the glorious majesty of God.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>The glory as it were</hi> (quasi,
Gr. ὡς) of the only-begotten;
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, glory <hi rend='italic'>such as was becoming</hi>
the only-begotten, &amp;c.
Beware of taking the meaning
to be: a glory like that of the
Son of God, but not His. As
St. Chrys. points out, the ὡς
here expresses not similitude,
but the most real identity<note place='foot'>Compare our expression: he acted <emph>like</emph> a man.</note>:
<q>As if he said: We have
seen His glory such as it <emph>was
becoming and right</emph> that the
only begotten and true Son of
God should have.</q> S. Chrys.
on John, Hom. xii. <hi rend='bold'>Of the
Father</hi> should be <hi rend='bold'>from the
Father</hi>, and may be joined
either with <q>glory,</q> or with
<q>only-begotten.</q><note place='foot'>Verba <q>a Patre</q> aeque jungi possunt nomini sive <q>unigeniti,</q> sive
<q>gloriam.</q> Si primum, sensus erit unigeniti, qui est ex Patre, neque enim
Verbum γεννάσθαι, quod continetur in μονογενοῦς constructum reperitur cum
praepositione παρά.&mdash;Patriz.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Full of grace and truth.</hi>
(πλήρης, in the nominative, is
the correct reading). This is
to be connected closely with
the beginning of the verse:
<q>The Word was made flesh,
and dwelt among us, full of
grace and truth,</q> and the other
clause, <hi rend='bold'>And we saw His glory</hi>,
&amp;c., is parenthetic, thrown in to
prove the preceding statement.
</p>

<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>

<p>
Christ is said to have been
full of grace and truth, not
merely in Himself, but also, as
the following verses prove, in
reference to men with whom
He freely shared them.
Kuinoel, followed by Patrizzi,
understands by <q>grace and
truth</q> true grace or true
benefits. But it is more natural
to take grace and truth as two
distinct things, seeing that they
are again mentioned separately
(ἡ χάρις καὶ ἡ ἀλήθεια) in
verse 17. Grace may be understood
in its widest sense; for
not only had Christ the <q>gratia
unionis,</q> as it is called, whereby
His humanity was hypostatically
united to the Divinity;
but, moreover, His human soul
was replenished to its utmost
capacity with created grace,
which not only sanctified Him,
but was also through Him a
source of sanctification to us.
See St. Thomas, p. 2, sec. 7, 8.
Christ is said to be <q>full of
truth,</q> not only because <q>all
the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge are hidden in Him</q>
(Col. ii. 3), but also because, as
verse 17 states, He gave us the
knowledge of the true faith and
true way of salvation.
</p>

<anchor id='I_15'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>15. Ioannes testimonium perhibet
de ipso, et clamat, dicens:
Hic erat quem dixi: Qui post
me venturus est, ante me factus
est: quia prior me erat.</cell>
<cell>15. John beareth witness of
him, and crieth out, saying:
This was he of whom I spoke:
He that shall come after me, is
preferred before me: because
he was before me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
15. <hi rend='bold'>John.</hi> The Baptist (for
it is he who is meant: comp.
with John i. 27; Mark i. 4, 7;
Luke iii. 2, 16) is now referred
to parenthetically, as confirming
what our Evangelist has
said, namely, that the eternal
Word dwelt among men.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Crieth out.</hi> (Gr. perf. with
pres. signif., Beel., <hi rend='italic'>Gr. Gram.</hi>,
§ 41, 4 (B) note); viz., gives
solemn, public testimony.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>This was he of whom I
spoke</hi> (rather, said). Some,
like Patrizzi, think that the
testimony of the Baptist here
referred to is a distinct testimony
not mentioned elsewhere.
Others, and with more probability,
hold that the Evangelist
mentions here by anticipation
the same testimony whose circumstances
he describes in
verses 29 and 30.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>He that shall come after
me</hi>, in His public ministry, <hi rend='bold'>is
preferred before me, because
he was before me</hi>. Some
commentators, as Kuinoel and
Patrizzi, understand <q>before</q>
in both cases of <emph>time</emph>: is
before Me, because He is
eternal; others, as St. Chrys.
and Toletus, in both cases of
dignity: is preferred before Me,
because really preferable; and
others, as our English version,
with St. Augustine, St. Thomas,
Beelen, Alford, in the former
case of dignity in the latter of
time: is preferred before Me,
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
because He is eternal. The
last seems the correct interpretation,
and in it the past
tense <q>is preferred</q> (ante me
factus est) is used prophetically
for the future, or may be explained
as a past: has been
preferred in the designs of God.<note place='foot'>Patrizzi, following Kuinoel, contends that ἐμπρόσθεν (before) is never
used of priority in dignity; but see Alford, who cites Gen. xlviii. 20, as well
as Plato and Demosthenes, for this meaning.</note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Et de plenitudine eius
nos omnes accepimus, et
gratiam pro gratia.</cell>
<cell>16. And of his fulness we all
have received, and grace for
grace.</cell></row>
<row><cell>17. Quia lex per Moysen
data est, gratia et veritas per
Iesum Christum facta est.</cell>
<cell>17. For the law was given
by Moses, grace and truth
came by Jesus Christ.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. After the parenthetic
clause contained in verse 15,
the Evangelist, not the Baptist,
continues regarding the Word:
<hi rend='bold'>And of his fulness</hi> (see verse
<ref target='I_14'>14</ref>) <hi rend='bold'>we have all received, and
grace for grace</hi>. The second
<q>and</q> is explanatory. <hi rend='bold'>Grace
for grace</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>&mdash;(1) the grace
of eternal life following on the
grace of justification here; or
(2) abundant grace, according
as the grace given to Christ
was abundant: gratia nobis
pro gratia Christi (Rom. v.
15); or (3) the more perfect
grace of the New Law, instead
of that given under the Old
Law (Chrysostom, Cyril,
Patrizzi); or (4), and best, by
a Hebraism, abundant grace.
<q>aντ'i dicitur de successione,
gratiam unam post aliam
(gratiam cumulatam).</q> (Beel.,
<hi rend='italic'>Gr. Gram.</hi>, § 51 A.) So also Kuin.
</p>

<p>
17. The Evangelist confirms
what is stated in verse 16, and
at the same time takes occasion
to prefer Christ to Moses,
as he has already preferred
Him to the Baptist. Moses
was but the medium of <emph>communicating</emph>
to the Jews the
Mosaic Law, which only
pointed out man's duty,
without enabling him to fulfil
it&mdash;Rom. vii. 7, 8; but Christ
was the <emph>source</emph> and <emph>author</emph> of
grace and truth to us; of all
the graces whereby we are to
merit heaven, and of the
perfect knowledge of the true
faith. This is, doubtless,
directed against some of the
Judaizers, who held that
sanctification through the
Mosaic Law was at all times
possible, even after the Christian
religion was established.
</p>

<anchor id='I_18'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Deum nemo vidit
unquam: unigenitus Filius,
qui est in sinu Patris, ipse
enarravit.</cell>
<cell>18. No man hath seen God
at any time: the only-begotten
Son who is in the bosom of the
Father, he hath declared him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. There is considerable
difference of opinion as to the
drift or bearing of this verse.
Some think that a reason is
given why only Christ could
give the truth, because only
He saw God in His essence.
Others, that a reason is given
why the gifts of Christ mentioned
in the preceding verse,
are superior to the Law given
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
by Moses, namely, because
Moses never saw God in His
essence. Others, that the
evangelist explains how he
and his fellow-Apostles received
of Christ's fulness, not only
through what Christ did (17),
but through what He taught
(18); and the necessity for
such a Divine teacher is shown
by the fact that no one but He
ever saw God. So St. Thomas.
</p>

<p>
Others, as Maldonatus and
Patrizzi, hold that the Evangelist
is here adding to his own
testimony, and that of the
Baptist, the testimony of our
Lord Himself, in favour of all
that he has said regarding
our Lord in this sublime
prologue; the meaning being:
What I have said regarding
the eternity, personality, and
Divinity of the Word, regarding
His power as creator and
regenerator, and regarding
His incarnation, I have neither
seen with my own eyes, nor
learned from anyone who saw,
for <q>no man hath seen God
at any time,</q> but Jesus Christ
Himself explained these things
to me.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>No man hath seen God at
any time.</hi> If understood of
the vision of <emph>comprehension</emph> this
is universally true of every
creature, man or angel; if of
seeing God in His essence
without comprehending Him,
it is true of all while they are
here below. The latter is the
sense here, for the Evangelist
wishes to signify that he could
not have learned from any
mere mortal the foregoing
doctrine. The saints in
heaven see God in His essence,
for as our Evangelist tells us
in his First Epistle: <q>We shall
see Him as He is</q> (1 John iii.
2. See also <ref target='XVII_3'>John xvii. 3</ref>).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>The only-begotten Son.</hi>
Instead of: <q>The only-begotten
Son,</q> the reading:
<q>God only-begotten</q> is found
in very many ancient authorities,
and is almost equally
probable. Were it certain, it
would be an additional proof
of Christ's Divinity. Christ is
the only-begotten Son of God,
because while He is the natural
Son of God, all others are
but adopted sons.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Who is in the bosom of
the Father</hi> (εἰς τὸν κόλπον
τοῦ πατρός). This means that
the Son is consubstantial
with the Father: <q>In illo ergo
sinu, id est in occultissimo
paternae naturae et essentiae,
quae excedit omnem virtutem
creaturae, est unigenitus Filius,
et ideo consubstantialis est
Patri.</q> St. Thomas on this
verse.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>He hath declared him.</hi>
<q>Him</q> is not represented in
the original; and if our view
of the verse is the correct one,
the object of the verb <q>hath
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
declared</q> is not so much the
Word, as the doctrine contained
in this prologue concerning
Him.<note place='foot'>Thus far, the prologue of our Gospel, of which Franzelin truly says:&mdash;<q>Singula
doctrinae capita de J. Christo vero Deo, Deique Filio in unum
quodamodo collecta verticem conspiciuntur. Hoc enim loco is qui in tempore
caro factus est, docetur esse Deus, Deus aeternus, Deus creator universi, Deus
auctor gratiae et ordinis supernaturalis, Deus cui supremus cultus debetur.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>De
Verbo Incarn.</hi>, Th. 8.</note>
</p>

<anchor id='I_19'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Et hoc est testimonium
Ioannis, quando miserunt
Iudaei ab Ierosolymis sacerdotes
et Levitas ad eum, ut interrogarent
eum: Tu quis es?</cell>
<cell>19. And this is the testimony
of John, when the Jews
sent from Jerusalem priests
and Levites to him, to ask him:
Who art thou?</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. The Evangelist now
records, with its various circumstances,
one of the most
solemn testimonies borne by
the Baptist to Christ. The
<q>Jews</q> are probably the
Sanhedrim, whose duty it was
to inquire into the credentials
of preachers. The deputation
was, therefore, a most solemn
one, sent by the Sanhedrim,
from the Jewish capital, composed
of Priests and Levites,
to make inquiries regarding a
momentous question.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Et confessus est, et non
negavit: et confessus est:
Quia non sum ego Christus.</cell>
<cell>20. And he confessed, and
did not deny: and he confessed:
I am not the Christ.</cell></row></table>

<p>
20. The Baptist first confesses
what he is not, and what
many at the time believed
him to be, namely, the Christ
(Luke iii. 15).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>21. Et interrogaverunt eum:
Quid ergo? Elias es tu? Et
dixit: Non sum. Propheta es
tu? Et respondit: Non.</cell>
<cell>21. And they asked him:
What then? Art thou Elias?
And he said: I am not. Art
thou the prophet? And he
answered: No.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22. Dixerunt ergo ei: Quis
es, ut responsum demus his qui
miserunt nos? quid dicis de
teipso?</cell>
<cell>22. They said therefore unto
him: Who art thou, that we
may give an answer to them
that sent us? What sayest
thou of thyself?</cell></row></table>

<p>
21. <hi rend='bold'>Art thou Elias?</hi> This
question arose from a misunderstanding
of Mal. iv. 5. <hi rend='bold'>Art
thou the prophet?</hi> (ὁ προφήτης),
as foretold by Moses (Deut.
xviii. 15). These interrogators
evidently regarded <q>the prophet</q>
as different from the Messias,
though in reality they were
the same. See Acts iii. 22-24.
</p>

<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Ait: Ego vox clamantis
in deserto: Dirigite viam
Domini, sicut dixit Isaias
propheta.</cell>
<cell>23. He said: <hi rend='italic'>I am the voice
of one crying in the wilderness,
Make straight the way of the
Lord</hi>, as said the prophet
Isaias.</cell></row></table>

<p>
23. The Baptist with striking
humility replies that he is
merely a voice, a passing
sign&mdash;yet that voice spoken
of by Isaias, which was to
call upon men to prepare their
hearts to receive Christ. The
Hebrew of Isaias may be
rendered: <q>The voice of one
that crieth in the wilderness:
Prepare ye the way of the
Lord (Jehovah), make straight
in the desert a highway for
our God.</q> Or, as is more
probable from the Hebrew
parallelism: <q>The voice of
one that crieth: Prepare ye
in the wilderness the way of
the Lord, make straight in
the desert a highway for our
God.</q> The Baptist, in applying
to himself this prophetic
passage, which is also applied
to him by the three Synoptic
Evangelists (Matt. iii. 3; Mark
i. 3; Luke iii. 4), gives merely
the substance of the original.
It is disputed whether Isaias
refers in the literal sense to
preparing the roads by which
the people should return from
the Babylonian Captivity, and
only in the mystical sense to
the preparation for the Messias,
or directly and literally to the
preparation for the Messias.
The latter seems the more
probable view. At any rate,
the words as applied here mean
that the Baptist is the voice
to which Isaias referred (in
some sense literal or mystical),
and that the burden of his cry
in the desert of Judea is, that
men who heard him in the
desert should prepare their
hearts for Christ.
</p>

<p>
The language is metaphorical,
and alludes to the custom prevalent
in those days of sending
forward couriers to get the roads
ready for advancing princes.
</p>

<anchor id='I_24'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Et qui missi fuerant,
erant ex Pharisaeis.</cell>
<cell>24. And they that were sent
were of the Pharisees.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. The Pharisees were a
sect among the Jews, so called
according to some from their
founder, Pharos, or more probably,
perhaps, from the
Hebrew verb <q>pharash</q>
(פרשׂ) to separate, as though
they were separated from and
above ordinary men, owing
to their strict observance of
the Law. They held many
erroneous tenets: thus&mdash;(1)
They relied for God's favour
upon their carnal descent from
Abraham. (2) They taught
that no oath was binding in
which the name of God or the
gold of the temple was not
expressly invoked. (3) That
internal sins were not forbidden;
and (4) some of their
schools admitted the right of
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
arbitrary divorce. See Matt. v.
33-36; xix. 3; xxiii.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Et interrogaverunt eum,
et dixerunt ei: Quid ergo baptizas,
si tu non es Christus,
neque Elias, neque propheta?</cell>
<cell>25. And they asked him,
and said to him: Why then
dost thou baptize, if thou be
not Christ, nor Elias, nor the
prophet?</cell></row>
<row><cell>26. Respondit eis Ioannes,
dicens: Ego baptizo in aqua:
medius autem vestrum stetit,
quem vos nescitis.</cell>
<cell>26. John answered them,
saying: I baptize with water;
but there hath stood one in the
midst of you, whom you know
not.</cell></row></table>

<p>
25. Being Pharisees, and
therefore versed in the Law,
they knew from Ezech. xxxvi.
25, and Zach. xiii. 1, that in
the time of the Messias there
was to be a baptism unto the
remission of sins. They concluded,
then, that only the
Messias, or some of those that
were to accompany Him, could
confer this baptism; and, not
understanding the import of
the Baptist's answer, verse 23,
in which he really declared
himself the herald of Christ's
coming, they ask why he presumes
to baptize.
</p>

<p>
26. The Baptist answers
that his is not the baptism
foretold by the Prophets, which
was to cleanse the sinner, but as
he had declared at the beginning
of his preaching, a baptism
unto penance (Matt. iii. 21).
John's baptism consisted in an
ablution of the body, accompanied
by the profession of a
penitential spirit, preparatory
to the coming of Him who
was to baptize with the Holy
Ghost and fire (Matt. iii. 11).
It could in no sense be said
to remit sin; while the baptism
of Christ really remits sin
(Acts ii. 38). Hence the
Council of Trent defined:&mdash;<q>Si
quis dixerit baptismum
Joannis habuisse eamdem vim
cum baptismo Christi anathema
sit.</q> (Sess. vii., Can. i.)
<hi rend='italic'>De Bapt.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>There hath stood</hi> (ἕστηκεν);
rather there <hi rend='bold'>standeth</hi>, the
perfect of this verb having a
present signification. Many
authorities indeed read the
later present στήκει. The meaning
is not that our Lord was
then actually present in the
crowd, else St. John would
probably have pointed him
out, as he did on the following
day (v. 29); but that He was
already present among the
Jewish people, was already
living among them.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>27. Ipse est qui post me venturus
est, qui ante me factus
est: cuius ego non sum dignus
ut solvam eius corrigiam calceamenti.</cell>
<cell>27. The same is he that
shall come after me, who is
preferred before me: the
latchet of whose shoe I am
not worthy to loose.</cell></row></table>

<p>
27. Many authorities omit
the words: <q>The same is,</q>
and also: <q>who is preferred
before me,</q> and then connect
with the preceding thus: <q>But
there hath stood One in the
midst of you whom you know
not, even He that shall come
(rather, that cometh) after me,
the latchet of whose shoe I am
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
not worthy to loose.</q> So
Tisch., Treg., Westcott, and
Hort, and the Rev. Vers. It
is not easy to explain why
the words are wanting in so
many MSS., if they were
written by St. John; certainly
it is easier to believe
that they were inserted by
some scribe to bring the verse
into closer resemblance to 15
and 30.
</p>

<p>
In the latter part of the
verse, the Baptist declares
himself unworthy to perform
the lowest menial service for
Christ. To loose the sandals
of their masters was the business
of slaves; yet for even
such service to Christ the
great Prophet confesses himself
unfit.
</p>

<anchor id='I_28'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>28. Haec in Bethania facta
sunt trans Iordanem, ubi erat
Ioannes baptizans.</cell>
<cell>28. These things were done
in Bethania beyond the Jordan,
where John was baptizing.</cell></row></table>

<p>
28. <hi rend='bold'>Bethania</hi>, here mentioned,
was situated in Peraea,
east of the Jordan, and must
be carefully distinguished from
the town of the same name, in
which Lazarus lived, about
two miles east of Jerusalem,
but west of the Jordan. Many
ancient authorities read Bethabara,
instead of Bethania.
Origen, though admitting that
nearly all the MSS. of his
time read Bethania, changed
it, on topographical grounds,
for Bethabara, in his edition
of our Gospel. Bethania,
according to some, means the
house of a ship (בית אניה),
while Bethabara means the
house of a ferry-boat (בית עברה);
so that, perhaps, they may
have been different names
for the same place on the
Jordan.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>29. Altera die vidit Ioannes
Iesum venientem ad se, et ait:
Ecce Agnus Dei, ecce qui tollit
peccatum mundi.</cell>
<cell>29. The next day John saw
Jesus coming to him, and he
saith: Behold the lamb of
God, behold him who taketh
away the sin of the world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
29. On the day after that
on which the Baptist bore the
preceding testimony, he saw
Jesus coming towards him.
This is the first time that the
mention of the Holy Name
occurs in our Gospel. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus</hi>
(Gr. Ἰησοῦς) is the same as
the Hebrew ישׂוע, which is
itself a contraction for יהושׂוע,
meaning God the Saviour.
That our Lord was so called,
to show that He was to
be the Saviour of men, is
clear from the words of the
angel to St. Joseph: <q>And
she shall bring forth a son;
and thou shalt call His name
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Jesus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> He shall <hi rend='italic'>save</hi> His
people from their sins</q>
(Matt. i. 21). We cannot be
certain whence Jesus was now
coming; but it seems very
probable that He was coming
from the desert after His forty
days' fast. We know from
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
St. Mark (i. 12) that as soon
as He was baptized, <q><emph>immediately</emph>
the spirit drove Him
out into the desert, and He
was in the desert forty days
and forty nights.</q> Since,
then, the present occasion
was subsequent to His baptism,
as we learn from a comparison
of verse 33 with
St. Matthew iii. 16 (for the
Baptist alludes, on the present
occasion, to what took place
at the baptism), it follows that
it must have been at least forty
days subsequent. Christ seems
too to have been absent when,
on the day before this, the
Baptist bore witness to Him,
else the Baptist would have
probably pointed Him out as
present, just as he does on
this occasion. All things
considered, then, it is likely
Jesus is now returning, and
that the Baptist here takes
the first opportunity of again
commending Him to the
people.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Behold the lamb</hi> (ὁ ἀμνός)
of God. The Baptist, in these
words, points out Jesus as the
Messias, for there is evident
allusion to Isaias liii. 7-12,
where the Messias is compared
to a lamb before his
shearers, bearing the sins of
many. In referring to Jesus
as a lamb, the Baptist recalled
this prophecy, insinuated
Christ's innocence, and perhaps
suggested that he was
to be sacrificed. <hi rend='bold'>Lamb of
God</hi>, because offered by God
for the sins of men, as we
speak of the sacrifice of Abraham,
meaning the sacrifice
offered by him; or it may
mean simply the Divine Lamb.
But the first opinion seems
more probable.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Who taketh away the
sin of the world.</hi> Every
word is emphatic. Christ not
merely covers up, or abstains
from imputing sin, but He
takes it away altogether, as
far as in Him lies. And it is
not merely legal impurities
that the sacrifice of this Divine
Lamb will remove, but sin; and
not merely the sin of one race,
like the Jewish, but the sin of
the whole world. <q>Sin,</q> in
the singular number, designates
as one collective whole
every sin of every kind.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>30. Hic est de quo dixi: Post
me venit vir qui ante me factus
est, quia prior me erat:</cell>
<cell>30. This is he of whom I
said: After me there cometh a
man, who is preferred before
me: because he was before me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
30. The Baptist goes on to
say that Jesus is that very
Person of whom he had said
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
on a previous occasion: <hi rend='bold'>After
me</hi>, &amp;c. Some take the reference
here to be to the testimony
of the preceding day, when the
Baptist bore witnesses in verse
27; others think the reference
is to the occasion spoken of
in verse 15, and regard that
testimony as distinct from the
one recorded in verse 27. We
prefer the latter view, and distinguish
in all six testimonies
of the Baptist recorded in the
Gospels. The first, before
Christ's Baptism, as in Matt. iii.
11; Mark i. 7; Luke iii. 16;
the second, as in John i. 15;
the third, as in John i. 19-27;
the fourth, as in John i. 29-34;
the fifth, as in John i. 35-36;
and the sixth and last, as in
John iii. 27-36.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>31. Et ego nesciebam eum,
sed ut manifestetur in Israel,
propterea veni ego in aqua
baptizans.</cell>
<cell>31. And I knew him not, but
that he may be made manifest
in Israel, therefore am I come
baptizing with water.</cell></row></table>

<p>
31. <hi rend='bold'>And I knew him not</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, <emph>officially</emph>, so as to be able
to bear witness to Him publicly;
or, better: I knew Him
not personally; I was unacquainted
with Him, so that
my testimony in His favour
then and now cannot be the
result of prejudice or partiality
towards Him. The Baptist
was indeed a relative of our
Lord (Luke i. 36), and must
known what his father,
Zachary, had declared, <q>Praeibis
enim ante faciem Domini
parare vias ejus</q> (Luke i. 76),
that he himself was to herald
the public coming of Jesus.
Yet, as Jesus dwelt at Nazareth
in Galilee during His private
life; and John, reared in the hill
country of Juda (Luke i. 39),
spent the years before his
public mission&mdash;perhaps from
his very childhood (as Origen,
Mald.) in the deserts (Luke i.
80), it is conceivable how
he might not have known
Christ's appearance. <q>What
wonder,</q> says St. Chrys., <q>if
he who from his childhood
spent his life in the desert,
away from his father's home,
did not know Christ?</q> But
as he had, while still in his
mother's womb, been divinely
moved to recognise Christ
(Luke i. 41, 44); so, immediately
before the baptism of
the latter, he was enabled to
recognise Him (Matt. iii. 14).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>32. Et testimonium perhibuit
Ioannes, dicens: Quia vidi
Spiritum descendentem quasi
columbam de coelo, et mansit
super eum.</cell>
<cell>32. And John gave testimony,
saying: I saw the
Spirit coming down as a dove
from heaven, and he remained
upon him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>33. Et ego nesciebam eum:
sed qui misit me baptizare in
aqua, ille mihi dixit: Super
quem videris Spiritum descendentem,
et manentem super
eum, hic est qui baptizat in
Spiritu Sancto.</cell>
<cell>33. And I knew him not:
but he, who sent me to baptize
with water, said to me: He
upon whom thou shalt see the
Spirit descending and remaining
upon him, he it is that baptizeth
with the Holy Ghost.</cell></row>
<row><cell>34. Et ego vidi: et testimonium
perhibui quia hic est
Filius Dei.</cell>
<cell>34. And I saw; and I gave
testimony, that this is the Son
of God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
32-34. Some, as Patrizzi,
take this as a new testimony;
others, with more probability,
take it as a continuation of the
preceding, and say that our
Evangelist inserts the words,
<hi rend='bold'>and John gave testimony</hi>,
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
in the middle of the Baptist's
words, in order to arrest the
reader's attention. The Baptist
here declares what he had
beheld after the baptism of
Christ (Matt. iii. 16), and how
that sign had been revealed to
him beforehand as one that
was to mark out the Messias,
and <emph>confirm</emph> his own faith: and
how he had accordingly on
that occasion borne witness
that Jesus is the Son of God.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>That baptizeth with the
Holy Ghost</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, who will
<emph>wash</emph> you, not with water, but in
the graces of the Holy Ghost.
There may be special reference
to the graces conferred in
Christian baptism.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>35. Altera die iterum stabat
Ioannes, et ex discipulis eius
duo.</cell>
<cell>35. The next day again
John stood, and two of his
disciples.</cell></row>
<row><cell>36. Et respiciens Iesum ambulantem,
dicit: Ecce Agnus
Dei.</cell>
<cell>36. And beholding Jesus
walking, he saith: Behold the
Lamb of God.</cell></row>
<row><cell>37. Et audierunt eum duo
discipuli loquentem, et secuti
sunt Iesum.</cell>
<cell>37. And the two disciples
heard him speak, and they
followed Jesus.</cell></row>
<row><cell>38. Conversus autem Iesus,
et videns eos sequentes se,
dicit eis: Quid quaeritis? Qui
dixerunt ei: Rabbi (quod dicitur
interpretatum, magister),
ubi habitas?</cell>
<cell>38. And Jesus turning, and
seeing them following him, said
to them: What seek you? Who
said to him: Rabbi (which is to
say, being interpreted, Master),
where dwellest thou?</cell></row></table>

<p>
35-38. Circumstances in
which the first disciples attached
themselves to Jesus.
The Evangelist interprets the
Syro-Chaldaic word Rabbi (38),
because he is writing for the
Christians of Asia Minor.
</p>

<anchor id='I_39'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>39. Dicit eis: Venite, et
videte. Venerunt, et viderunt
ubi maneret, et apud eum manserunt
die illo: hora autem erat
quasi decima.</cell>
<cell>39. He saith to them: Come
and see. They came, and
saw where he abode, and they
staid with him that day: now
it was about the tenth hour.</cell></row></table>

<p>
39. <hi rend='bold'>About the tenth hour.</hi>
According to those who hold
that St. John numbers the
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
hours of the day after the
Jewish method, the time here
indicated would be about two
hours before sunset. For the
Jews divided the natural day
or time of light into twelve
equal parts, each part being
one-twelfth of the whole, so
that the length of their hour
varied according to the season
of the year. If we suppose
St. John to number as we do
now, and as the Greeks did
then, the time here indicated
would be about 10 a.m.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>40. Erat autem Andreas frater
Simonis Petri unus ex duobus
qui audierant a Ioanne, et
secuti fuerant eum.</cell>
<cell>40. And Andrew the brother
of Simon Peter was one of the
two who had heard of John,
and followed him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
40. It is extremely probable
that the other who followed,
and whose name is not given,
was our Evangelist himself.
See <ref target='Intro_I_B_2'>Introd. I. B. 2</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>41. Invenit hic primum
fratrem suum Simonem, et
dicit ei: Invenimus Messiam
(quod est interpretatum Christus).</cell>
<cell>41. He findeth first his
brother Simon, and saith to
him: We have found the
Messias, which is, being interpreted,
the Christ.</cell></row></table>

<p>
41. <hi rend='bold'>First</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, before
the other (our Evangelist)
findeth his brother, James.
<hi rend='bold'>Messias</hi> (from the Hebrew
root <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Mashàch</foreign> (משׂח), to anoint)
= χριστός = anointed. It
was the custom to anoint
Hebrew kings, priests, and
prophets; and Christ, as combining
the three dignities in
Himself, was <hi rend='italic'>the anointed</hi> by
excellence.
</p>

<anchor id='I_42'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>42. Et adduxit eum ad
Iesum. Intuitus autem eum
Iesus, dixit: Tu es Simon filius Iona: tu vocaberis Cephas,
quod interpretatur Petrus.</cell>
<cell>42. And he brought him to
Jesus. And Jesus looking
upon him said: Thou art Simon the son of Jona: thou
shalt be called Cephas, which
is interpreted Peter.</cell></row></table>

<p>
42. Christ's omniscience is
left to be inferred from His
knowing Simon<note place='foot'>Simon, vel Symeon (Act xv. 14 sine var. lect. in Gr. codd., 2 Pet. i. 1,
א, A, K, L, P, &amp;c.) שׂמעון (exauditio, Gen. xxix. 33). <q>Nomen Patris aut
Jonas, Ἰωνᾶ (Matt. xvi. 17), aut Ἰωάνες vel Ἰωάννες (Joan xxi. 15) legitur;
Joan i. 43 codd. graeci alii Ἰωνᾶ alii Ἰωάνου vel Ἰωάννου; unde prius nomen non
essi nisi alterius corruptionem nec quidquam cum nomine prophetae Jonae
habere commune elucet.</q>&mdash;Corn. iii. § 212, note 1.</note> here at first
sight. <hi rend='bold'>Cephas</hi>, Syro-Chaldaic,
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Képha</foreign> (כפא); Hebrew <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Keph</foreign>
(כפ) = πέτρα (rock), from which
we have πέτρος with the feminine
termination changed into the
masculine. The change of
Simon's name was now predicted,
but was probably not
made till afterwards. See
Mark iii. 16.
</p>

<anchor id='I_43'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>43. In crastinum voluit exire
in Galilaeam, et invenit
Philippum. Et dicit ei Iesus:
Sequere me.</cell>
<cell>43. On the following day he
would go forth into Galilee,
and he findeth Philip. And
Jesus saith to him: Follow me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
43. <hi rend='bold'>On the following day
he would go forth.</hi> The
sense is: when He was about
to set out; <q>cum in eo esset,
ut e Judaea abiret</q> (Kuin.).
Jesus had come from Nazareth,
the home of His private life in
Galilee, to be baptized by John,
(Matt. iii. 13; Mark i. 9). He
had then spent forty days in the
desert, and been tempted there,
(Matt. iii. 16-iv. 3); had returned
from the desert to the
Jordan, and been witnessed to
again by the Baptist (see above
John i. <ref target='I_15'>15</ref>, <ref target='I_19'>19-36</ref>), and was now
on the point of returning to
Galilee.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Follow me.</hi> Philip to whom
these words were addressed
was afterwards the Apostle of
that name. The call to follow
our Lord on this occasion was
not the formal call to the
<emph>Apostleship</emph>, but rather an invitation
to him to become a
disciple. The same is to be
said regarding the others
referred to in this chapter,
Peter, Andrew, James, John,
and Nathanael. Four of these&mdash;Peter,
Andrew, James, and
John, who had in the meantime
returned to Galilee, and were
pursuing their calling of
fishermen, were again called,
Matt. iv. 18-22, Luke v. 1-11;
and on this second occasion
<q>leaving all things they
followed Him,</q> and became
inseparably attached to Him as
disciples. Finally, the solemn
formal call of the twelve to the
Apostleship is narrated, Matt.
x. 2; Luke vi. 13.
</p>

<anchor id='I_44'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>44. Erat autem Philippus
a Bethsaida, civitate Andreae
et Petri.</cell>
<cell>44. Now Philip was of
Bethsaida, the city of Andrew
and Peter.</cell></row></table>

<p>
44. <hi rend='bold'>Bethsaida.</hi> In our
view there were two towns
of this name: the one mentioned
here, on the western
shore of the sea of Galilee,
about four miles south of
Capharnaum; the other Bethsaida
Julias, situated to the
north east of the same sea.
The latter was enlarged and
greatly improved by Philip the
Tetrarch, son of Herod the
Great, who gave it the name
Julias, in honour of Julia the
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
daughter of the Roman
Emperor Augustus.
</p>

<anchor id='I_45'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>45. Invenit Philippus Nathanaël,
et dicit ei: Quem
scripsit Moyses in lege, et prophetae,
invenimus Iesum filium
Ioseph a Nazareth.</cell>
<cell>45. Philip findeth Nathanael,
and saith to him: We have
found him of whom Moses in
the law, and the prophets did
write, Jesus the son of Joseph
of Nazareth.</cell></row>
<row><cell>46. Et dixit ei Nathanaël:
A Nazareth potest aliquid boni
esse? Dicit ei Philippus: Veni,
et vide.</cell>
<cell>46. And Nathanael said to
him: Can anything of good
come from Nazareth? Philip
saith to him: Come and see.</cell></row></table>

<p>
45. Philip not only obeys
the call to become a disciple
himself, but brings another
disciple with him to Jesus.
Nathanael (= <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus dedit</foreign>) was
a native of Cana in Galilee
(John xxi. 2), and is most
probably identical with Bartholomew
(= son of Tolmai)
the Apostle, <q>For Nathanael
and Philip are coupled in John
i. 45, as Bartholomew and
Philip are here (Matt. x. 3);
Nathanael is named in the
very <emph>midst</emph> of Apostles, John
xxi. 2. <q>There were together
Simon Peter, and Thomas, who
is called Didymus, and
Nathanael who was of Cana
of Galilee, and the sons of
Zebedee.</q> Would anyone but
an Apostle be so named?
Finally, Matthew, Luke, and
Mark do not allude to
Nathanael, nor does John to
Bartholomew</q> (M'Carthy on
Matt. x. 3).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>The son of Joseph.</hi> Doubtless,
he means a son conceived
and born in the ordinary way.
So it was generally thought,
and so thought Philip, ignorant
of the miraculous conception
of Christ, and of His birth at
Bethlehem. It is absurd to
charge our Evangelist, as De
Wette has done, with ignorance
of Christ's miraculous
birth of a virgin, because he
records the ignorance of Philip.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Nazareth</hi>, for ever famous
as the scene of the incarnation,
was a little town in Lower
Galilee, in the tribal territory
of Zabulon. It was the dwelling-place
of our Lord during
His private life. Nazareth,
indeed all Galilee, was held in
contempt (see John <ref target='VII_50'>vii. 52</ref>),
and hence Nathanael's doubt,
(verse 46), though he was
himself a Galilean (John xxi. 2).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>47. Vidit Iesus Nathanaël
venientem ad se, et dicit de eo; Ecce vere Israelita, in quo
dolus non est.</cell>
<cell>47. Jesus saw Nathanael
coming to him, and he saith of him: Behold an Israelite indeed,
in whom there is no guile.</cell></row>
<row><cell>48. Dicit ei Nathanaël:
Unde me nosti? Respondit
Iesus, et dixit ei: Priusquam
te Philippus vocaret, cum esses
sub ficu, vidi te.</cell>
<cell>48. Nathanael saith to him:
Whence knowest thou me?
Jesus answered, and said to
him: Before that Philip called
thee, when thou wast under
the fig-tree, I saw thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>49. Respondit ei Nathanaël,
et ait: Rabbi, tu es Filius
Dei, tu es rex Israel.</cell>
<cell>49. Nathanael answered
him, and said: Rabbi, thou
art the Son of God, thou art
the King of Israel.</cell></row></table>

<p>
47-49. When Nathanael
had approached near enough
to be able to hear what was
said, but before he had spoken
anything from which our Lord
might have been thought to
guess at his character, our
Lord said: <hi rend='bold'>Behold an Israelite
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
indeed, in whom there is
no guile</hi>; that is to say, one
who, not merely by descent, but
by the simplicity and honesty of
his character, is a true son of
Jacob. See Gen. xxv. 27;
Rom. ix. 6. Jacob's name was
changed into Israel, after he
wrestled with the angel, Gen.
xxxii. 28.
</p>

<p>
47-49. Nathanael must have
felt convinced that he had been
hidden from Christ's natural
view, otherwise he could not
draw the inference which, aided
by divine grace, he draws.
Whether Nathanael yet recognised
Jesus to be true God,
and professed his belief in Him
as such, in the words of verse
49, is disputed. If we are to
judge from his words (ὁ υἱός),
the affirmative opinion seems
much more probable. The
words are an echo of the
Baptist's testimony (v. 34), but
Nathanael confesses not alone
Christ's Divine origin, but
also His human sovereignty:
Thou art the Son of God, Thou
art the King of Israel.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>50. Respondit Iesus, et dixit
ei: Quia dixi tibi: Vidi te sub
ficu, credis: maius his videbis.</cell>
<cell>50. Jesus answered and said
to him: Because I said unto
thee, I saw thee under the fig-tree,
thou believest: greater
things than these shalt thou see.</cell></row></table>

<p>
50. Jesus promises Nathanael
stronger arguments in proof of
His Divinity. In the words:
<hi rend='bold'>Greater things than these
shalt thou see</hi>, the plural these
seems to point to the class and
not merely the special incident.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>51. Et dicit ei: Amen, amen. dico vobis, videbitis coelum
apertum, et Angelos Dei ascendentes, et descendentes
supra Filium hominis.</cell>
<cell>51. And he saith to him: Amen, amen, I say to you,
you shall see the heaven opened, and the Angels of God
ascending and descending upon the son of man.</cell></row></table>

<p>
51. <hi rend='bold'>Amen, amen</hi>, is peculiar
to John. The other Evangelists
use <q>Amen</q> only once in
such asseverations. <q>Amen
means verily (at the end of a
prayer, so be it); and when
doubled, strengthens the asseveration,
and points to the
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
solemnity of the declaration
about to follow</q> (M'Ev.).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Son of man.</hi> This term,
probably derived in its Messianic
sense from Dan. vii. 13, 14,
was very rarely applied to
Christ, except by Himself, and
we find Him using it very
frequently (though not exclusively;
see, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Matt. ix. 6;
xxiii. 30; Acts vii. 56) in
connection with His privations,
sufferings, and death (Matt.
viii. 20; xii.40; xvii. 12; xxvi.
21-25; John iii. 14, &amp;c.).
It indicates that Christ was not
only man like Adam; but that,
unlike him, He was <emph>descended</emph>
of man, and therefore our
brother in the truest sense.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>You shall see.</hi> Though
Nathanael is addressed (and
He saith to <emph>him</emph>), yet the plural
(videbitis) shows that the wondrous
sign here promised was
to be seen not by him alone,
but at least by Philip also, and
probably by others. The meaning
of the prediction is obscure.
Evidently some great sign is
promised; but what it is, interpreters
are far from agreed.
Some take the words metaphorically,
others literally.
</p>

<p>
Of those who understand
them metaphorically, some
take the sense to be: You shall
see numerous miracles, such as
are usually attributed to angels
(or, in the performance of which
angels shall minister to Me)
wrought by Me, the Son of
Man, during My public life. So
Beelen, Maier, &amp;c. We cannot
accept this view, for it seems
highly improbable that our Lord
would speak in language so obscure
to the guileless Nathanael
and his companions on an occasion
like the present, when Nathanael
had only just believed.
</p>

<p>
Others understand of the
spiritual glories of the whole
period from the commencement
of Christ's public mission till
the end of the world. Alford,
explaining this view (which, by
the way, he calmly claims to
have been <q>the interpretation
of all commentators of any
depth in all times</q>!) says: <q>It
is not the outward visible
opening of the material heavens
nor ascent or descent of angels
in the sight of men, which the
Lord here announces, but the
series of glories which was
about to be unfolded in His
Person and work, from that
time forward.</q> Our difficulty
in regard to this view is the
same as in regard to the preceding.
</p>

<p>
St. Augustine is generally
supposed to have understood
this text in reference to the
preachers of the New Testament,
<q>ascending</q> when they
preach the more sublime,
<q>descending,</q> when they preach
the more elementary doctrines
of religion. If St. Augustine
meant this as a <emph>literal</emph> interpretation
of the passage, as he
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
certainly seems to do in Tract
vii. on this Gospel, we cannot
accept it. Surely, something
stranger and more striking is
promised here, after the opening
of the heavens, than the
sight of preachers!
</p>

<p>
Others hold that we must
interpret this passage entirely
in the light of Jacob's dream,
Gen. xxviii. 12. Jacob saw a
ladder reaching from earth to
heaven, with angels ascending
and descending upon it. That
vision meant in his regard that
God would make him the object
of His special protection (see
Gen. xxviii. 13-15). And now
Nathanael, who is <hi rend='italic'>an Israelite
indeed</hi>, a true son of Jacob (v. 47),
is told that he and others shall
see that Divine favour and
protection which Jacob's vision
signified, extended in such an
extraordinary manner to Christ,
during His life, that it will be
most manifest He is the Son of
God.
</p>

<p>
This view we regard as
probable. The Fathers tell us
that Nathanael was particularly
well versed in the Scriptures,
and our Lord's words might
readily recall to his mind
Jacob's dream, with all its
significance of Divine favour
and protection.
</p>

<p>
Of the opinions that attempt
to explain the words literally,
some may be dismissed at
once. Thus there cannot be
reference to the angels who
appeared at Christ's birth, or
after His temptations (Matt.
iv. 11), for Christ speaks of an
event still to come, whereas
His birth and temptations
were already past. Nor can
there be reference to the transfiguration,
even if we suppose
angels to have been present;
nor to the agony in the garden;
nor to the resurrection; for
on none of these occasions
did Philip and Nathanael see
the angels. Less improbable,
perhaps, is the view that there
is reference to the ascension,
and the two angels that appeared
then (Acts i. 10). But
this opinion too we reject without
hesitation. In the passage
of the Acts referred to, St. Luke
tells us: <q>And while they were
beholding Him going up to
heaven, behold two men <hi rend='italic'>stood
by them</hi> in white garments.</q>
Now, it is clear that angels
who stood by the apostles and
disciples, cannot possibly be
those referred to here as <q>ascending
and descending upon
the Son of Man.</q>
</p>

<p>
A Lapide refers the prediction
to some miraculous
vision seen by the disciples
during our Lord's life, and
not recorded in the Gospels.
But it seems improbable that
the fulfilment of such a prediction
would be passed over in
silence by all the Evangelists.
</p>

<p>
Finally, there is the opinion,
which is held by Maldonatus,
that there is reference to the
last judgment, when the
heavens shall be opened, and
Christ shall come riding on
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
the clouds of heaven, accompanied
by angels, and all
men shall be forced to confess
Him God. This seems
to us the most probable interpretation.
For, first, it is
likely that our Lord refers to
the clearest and most incontrovertible
proof that shall be
given of His Divinity; and
such will be His coming in
majesty to judge the world.
Secondly, we know that on
another occasion, when he was
challenged by the Jewish High
Priest to say if he was the Son
of God, He appealed to this
same proof of His Divinity:
<q>I adjure thee by the living
God, that thou tell us if thou
be the Christ, the Son of God.
Jesus saith to him: Thou
hast said it. Nevertheless, I
say to you: Hereafter you
shall see the Son of Man sitting
at the right hand of the
power of God, and coming in
the clouds of heaven</q> (Matt.
xxvi. 63-64). Probably the
expression: <hi rend='bold'>ascending and
descending</hi> is to be understood
metaphorically, even in
this opinion, and means merely
that the angels shall be <emph>attendant
upon</emph> the great Judge,
ready to execute His will.
The order is remarkable: they
are said first to ascend, and
then to descend, as was the
case also in Jacob's vision.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-11. <hi rend='bold'>Christ at the marriage feast in Cana changes water into wine.</hi>
</p>

<p>
12. <hi rend='bold'>He goes down to Capharnaum.</hi>
</p>

<p>
13-17. <hi rend='bold'>At the approach of the Pasch He goes up to Jerusalem, and there
drives the buyers and sellers out of the Temple.</hi>
</p>

<p>
18-22. <hi rend='bold'>Challenged by the Jews for a sign of His authority, He predicts
His own Resurrection, as the disciples called to mind after He
had risen.</hi>
</p>

<p>
23-25. <hi rend='bold'>On the occasion of this first Pasch of His public life many believe
in Him because of His miracles.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Et die tertia nuptiae factae
sunt in Cana Galilaeae, et erat
mater Iesu ibi.</cell>
<cell>1. And the third day there was
a marriage in Cana of Galilee:
and the mother of Jesus was
there.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2. Vocatus est autem et
Iesus, et discipuli eius, ad
nuptias.</cell>
<cell>2. And Jesus also was invited,
and his disciples, to
the marriage.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. The Evangelist having
narrated how our Lord was
witnessed to by the Baptist,
and joined by His first disciples,
now proceeds to tell how He
bore testimony of Himself by
His miracles.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>The third day.</hi> Naturally
the third from the point of time
last referred to, in verse 43.
</p>

<p>
The marriage feast was
celebrated for a week among
the Jews, and this custom had
come down from very ancient
times, as we learn from the
book of Judges, xiv. 12.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Cana of Galilee</hi> was situated
most probably in the tribe
of Zabulon near Capharnaum.
There was another Cana in the
tribe of Aser, near Sidon (see
Jos. xix. 28).
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='bold'>And Jesus also was
invited</hi>; that is to say, He
also, <emph>as well as</emph> the Blessed
Virgin, was invited. Mald.
holds that καὶ (et) is explanatory:
on that account,
that is to say, because
she <emph>was</emph> there as a friend
of the family, Jesus was
<emph>invited</emph>.
</p>

<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Et deficiente vino, dicit
mater Iesu ad eum: Vinum
non habent.</cell>
<cell>3. And the wine failing, the
mother of Jesus saith to him:
They have no wine.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. <hi rend='bold'>And the wine failing</hi>
(Gr. having failed). Either all
the wine was already drunk,
or, at least, there was no
more to be drawn; the last was
on the table. When we take
into account what Mary says
to the servants (v. 5), it is plain
that her object in telling Jesus
that the wine had run short,
was not that He and His
disciples might retire (Bengel),
nor that He might exhort the
company to patience (Calvin),
nor that He might buy wine
(Kuin.), but that He might work
a miracle. <q>The Mother of the
Lord having heard of the testimony
of the Baptist, and seeing
the disciples gathered round
her Son, the circumstances of
whose miraculous birth she
treasured in her heart (Luke ii.
19, 51) must have looked now
at length for the manifestation
of His power, and thought that
an occasion only was wanting.
Yet even so she leaves all to
His will</q> (Westc., in <hi rend='italic'>Speaker's
Comm.</hi>).
</p>

<anchor id='II_4'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Et dicit ei Iesus: Quid
mihi et tibi est mulier: Nondum venit hora mea.</cell>
<cell>4. And Jesus saith to her:
Woman, what is it to me and
to thee? My hour is not yet come.</cell></row></table>

<p>
4. <hi rend='bold'>Woman, what is it to
me and to thee?</hi> The Vulgate
has. <q>Quid mihi et tibi <emph>est</emph>,
mulier?</q> But the verb is not in
the Greek text (τί ἐμοὶ καὶ
σοί γύναι?), which would therefore
be better translated:
<q>What to Me and to thee,
woman?</q> The Revised Version
of the Church of England
renders: <q>Woman, what have
I to do with thee?</q>
</p>

<p>
Most Protestant writers have
held that these words of our
Lord contain a reproof of His
mother. Among Catholics
many have held that the
words contain <emph>the semblance</emph> of
reproof; to teach us, not Mary,
that we are not to be influenced
by motives of flesh and blood
in the service of God. Others
have held (and this is the
general opinion of modern
Catholic commentators) that
the words do not contain even
the appearance of reproof.
</p>

<p>
(1) It is now generally
acknowledged even by Protestant
commentators that the
term γύναι is not reproachful
or disrespectful. According to
Alford there is no reproach in
the term, but rather respect;
and Trench says: <q>So far from
any harshness, the compellation
has something solemn in
it</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Miracles</hi>, p. 100). Liddell
and Scott's <hi rend='italic'>Lexicon</hi>, says: <q>It
is often used as a term of
respect or affection, mistress,
lady.</q> Yet Calvin impiously
asserts that our Lord does not
deign to call Mary His Mother:
<q>Deinde cur simplici repulsa
non contentus eam in vulgarem
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
mulierum ordinem cogit, nec
jam matris nomine dignatur?</q>
<q>Why doubt of the heavenly
origin of a reformation wrought
by such reasoning as this?</q>
(McCarthy).
</p>

<p>
Father Coleridge thinks that
Mary is addressed here by the
title γύναι because that is <q>what
we may call her official and
theological title ... for she is
the <q>woman</q> of whom our Lord
was born; she is the <q>woman</q>
of whom God spake to our first
parents when He made them
the promise of a Redeemer after
the fall; she is the <q>woman</q>
to whom the whole range of
types look forward, who was
to conceive and compass a man
(Jer. xxxi. 22); she is the
<q>woman,</q> the second Eve, as
our Lord is the Man, and the
Son of Man, the second
Adam.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Publ. Life of our Lord</hi>, vol. i., p. 185.</note> But whatever may
be thought of this view, enough
has been said to show that
the term γύναι does not imply
reproof or disrespect.
</p>

<p>
(2) Neither does the phrase
<q>What to Me and to thee?</q>
(τί ἐμοὶ καὶ σοί?). We find
exactly the same phrase
in Judg. xi. 12; 3 Kings
xvii. 18; 4 Kings iii. 13; 2
Paral. xxxv. 21; Mark v. 7;
Luke viii. 28.<note place='foot'>Consult also, as almost exactly the same, 2 Kings xvi. 10; Josue xxii. 24;
Matthew viii. 29; Matthew xxvii. 29; Mark i. 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
(A). After a candid examination
of these texts, it must,
we think, appear that the
meaning of the phrase is <emph>not</emph>:
What does this concern you
and Me? for in some, if not all,
of the passages cited the phrase
cannot have that meaning.
Besides, is it likely Jesus would
say that the wants of the poor,
who were His hosts, and
perhaps His relatives, and their
shame consequent upon those
wants, did not concern Him?
</p>

<p>
(B). Neither is the meaning:
What have I to do with you, or,
what have I in common with
you? (as author of a miracle
such as you suggest); it must
proceed from My Divine nature,
while only My human nature
has been derived from you (so
Augus., Tolet., Patriz.). For&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) This is not the meaning
of the phrase in the parallel
passages.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Christ gives a different
reason: <hi rend='italic'>My hour is not yet come.</hi>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) His person hypostatically
united to His human nature,
had that nature in common
with her, and it is of His person
(<foreign rend='italic'>mihi</foreign>), not of His Divine
nature merely that He speaks.
</p>

<p>
(C). What the precise meaning
of the phrase is, it is difficult
to determine with certainty.
In all the passages where it
occurs, it seems to indicate
some divergence between the
thoughts or wishes of the
persons so brought together.
Most probably it is here a <emph>remonstrance</emph>;
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
because the suggestion
that Christ should work a
miracle is <emph>inconvenient or inopportune</emph>,
inasmuch as it brings
moral pressure to bear upon
Him to make Him begin His
miracles before the time at
which, prescinding from this
suggestion, His public miracles
were to begin. Something
similar are the words of God to
Moses: <q><hi rend='italic'>Let Me alone</hi>, that
My wrath may be kindled
against them, and that I may
destroy them</q> (Exod. xxxii.
10). On that occasion God,
after remonstrating, granted the
prayer of Moses, just as on this
occasion, after remonstrating,
He yielded to the suggestion of
His Mother. So St. Cyril of
Alex., St. Amb., Corl, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Whether the above be the
correct meaning of the phrase
or not, one thing is clear,
against Calvin, Alf., Trench,
&amp;c., that the words cannot contain
a rebuke&mdash;not a <emph>real</emph>
rebuke; because there was no
fault on Mary's part, not even
venial (Council of Trent, sess.
vi., can. 23). St. Aug., whose
authority Protestants must respect,
whatever they may think
of that of the Council of Trent,
says: <q>De Sancta Maria Virgine,
propter honorem Christi,
nullam prorsus quando de
peccato agitur volo habere
quaestionem</q> (<hi rend='italic'>De Natura et
Gratia</hi>, ch. xxxvi.). Moreover, if
the Blessed Virgin were guilty
of any fault, it would be either
because of the thing suggested,
or of some circumstance of
time, place, motive, &amp;c. Now,
our Lord granted what she
suggested; the object was
therefore, good. The circumstances
were the very same
when the miracle was wrought
as when it was suggested. As
to her motive, it may have been
good&mdash;charity for the poor.
Why, then, ascribe a bad
motive, such as vanity, without
convincing proof? That
the suggestion was acceded to,
goes to show that it was made
in circumstances in which it
was not displeasing to God.<note place='foot'>See M'Carthy, <hi rend='italic'>Gospels of the Sundays</hi>, p. 72.</note>
</p>

<p>
Neither is there in the words a
<emph>feigned</emph> rebuke, that is, feigned
for our instruction, to show
us that we are not to regard
flesh and blood in doing the
work of God (Mald., Tolet.,
&amp;c.); for Christ actually did
what was suggested; and,
besides, it is Catholic teaching
that Christ in heaven grants
many requests to His Mother,
<emph>because</emph> she is His Mother.
</p>

<p>
In vain, then, have Protestants
tried to find, in these
words of our Lord, anything
derogatory to the dignity of
His Blessed Mother. To every
interpretation which would give
such a sense to His words, we
may answer, with St. Justin,
Martyr: <q>Non verbo matrem
objurgavit qui facto honoravit.</q>
<q>He reproved not His
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
mother by what He said who
honoured her by what He did.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>My hour is not yet come.</hi>
In our interpretation it is easy
to explain these words. His
hour is not the hour of His
death, nor the time when the
want of wine would be fully felt,
but the time at which, according
to the ordinary providence
of God, and prescinding from
His Mother's suggestion, His
public miracles were to begin.
</p>

<anchor id='II_5'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. Dicit mater eius ministris: Quodcumque dixerit
vobis, facite.</cell>
<cell>5. His mother saith to the waiters: Whatsoever he shall
say to you, do ye.</cell></row></table>

<p>
5. <hi rend='bold'>Whatsoever he shall
say to you, do ye.</hi> These
are not the words of one
whose suggestion had been
reproved and rejected.
</p>

<anchor id='II_6'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Erant autem ibi lapideae
hydriae sex positae secundum
purificationem Iudaeorum, capientes
singulae metretas binas
vel ternas.</cell>
<cell>6. Now there were set there
six waterpots of stone, according
to the manner of the
purifying of the Jews, containing
two or three measures
a-piece.</cell></row></table>

<p>
6. For the custom of the
Jews in the matter of ablutions,
see Matt. xv. 2; Mark vii. 2-5.
The μετρητής was a Greek liquid
measure, containing about nine
gallons, or, to be accurate,
eight gallons 7.4 pints. There
were six jars, or water-pots,
each containing two or three
measures. If each jar contained
two measures, the whole
quantity of wine miraculously
provided would be = 6 × 2 ×
9 = 108 gallons. If each contained
three measures, the whole would be = 6 × 3 × 9
= 162 gallons. The quantity of
wine miraculously produced
was therefore very great, being
at least about 108 gallons. It is
absurd, however, to seek in
this miracle of our Divine Lord
any excuse for intemperance.
As well might God be accused
of conniving at intemperance,
because He fills the grape each
year with the moisture of earth
and heaven, and then transmutes
this into the nobler juices
which He knows man will
convert into wine. He gives
in every case, that we may use,
not that we may abuse. If the
quantity of wine miraculously
provided on this occasion was
large, we ought to remember
that the marriage feast lasted
for a week; that there were
probably many guests present,
whose number was considerably
increased by the invitation,
at the last moment, of Christ
and His disciples on their
arrival from Judea; that others
would probably be attracted
now by the fame of this miracle,
and the desire to see Him who
had wrought it; and, finally,
that the quantity of the wine
made the miracle more striking.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Dicit eis Iesus. Implete
hydrias aqua. Et impleverunt
eas usque ad summum.</cell>
<cell>7. Jesus saith to them: Fill
the waterpots with water. And
they filled them up to the brim.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. <hi rend='bold'>To the brim.</hi> So that
there was no room left to mix
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
wine or anything else with the
water; this shows, too, the
quantity of wine that was
miraculously supplied.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>8. Et dicit eis Iesus: Haurite
nunc, et ferte architriclino. Et
tulerunt.</cell>
<cell>8. And Jesus saith to them:
Draw out now, and carry to
the chief steward of the feast.
And they carried it.</cell></row></table>

<p>
8. <hi rend='bold'>Chief steward</hi> (Gr. ἀρχός,
chief, or ruler, and τρίκλινος,
a dining-room, with three
couches, and more generally,
a dining-room). The president
of the feast, according to some,
was <emph>one of the guests</emph> selected
by the host, or by the unanimous
consent of the guests;
according to others, he was
not a guest, but the <emph>chief
servant</emph>. In the first view he
corresponds with the συμποσιάρχης
of the Greeks, and the
<q>magister convivii,</q> or <q>arbiter
bibendi,</q> of the Romans; and
this we take to be correct, for his
familiarity with the bridegroom
(v. 10) bespeaks the friend
rather than the servant.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>9. Ut autem gustavit architriclinus
aquam vinum factam,
et non sciebat unde esset,
ministri autem sciebant qui
hauserant aquam, vocat sponsum
architriclinus.</cell>
<cell>9. And when the chief
steward had tasted the water
made wine, and knew not
whence it was, but the waiters
knew who had drawn the
water; the chief steward
calleth the bridegroom.</cell></row></table>

<p>
9. St. John mentions that
the president of the feast knew
not whence the wine was, nor
how it had been produced, in
order to show that his testimony
in its favour was not
the result of previous collusion
with Jesus. <hi rend='bold'>Who had drawn
the water.</hi> ἠντληκότες is the
form for the pluperfect, as well
as for the perfect participle,
and is rightly rendered <q>had
drawn.</q> We consider it more
likely that the reference is to
their drawing the water from the
well in order to fill the water-pots.
But if the reference be
to drawing the wine from the
pots (in v. 8 the same Greek
verb is used in reference to that
action), then the wine is called
water because it had been water
so recently, just as the serpent
is called a rod in Exod. vii. 12.
because it had been a rod
immediately before. It is most
likely that the conversion
took place in the water-pots,
and not on the way from them
to the table.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>10. Et dicit ei: Omnis homo
primum bonum vinum ponit: et
cum inebriati fuerint, tunc id,
quod deterius est: Tu autem
servasti bonum vinum usque
adhuc.</cell>
<cell>10. And saith to him:
Every man at first setteth forth
good wine, and when men have
well drank, then that which is
worse. But thou hast kept
the good wine until now.</cell></row></table>

<p>
10. Most probably the Greek
word (μεθυσθῶσιν) rendered
in the Vulgate <q>inebriati
fuerint</q> does not here imply
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
drunkenness, but only drinking
freely. <q>In classical use
it generally, but not always,
implies intoxication. In the
Hellenistic writers, however,
as Josephus, Philo, and the
LXX., it very often denotes
drinking freely, and the hilarity
consequent, which is probably
the sense here</q> (Bloomf.). In
any case, whatever meaning
we give the word here, the
president of the feast merely
speaks of what was the common
practice, without saying
that the guests at this particular
feast had indulged to the
same extent.
</p>

<anchor id='II_11'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. Hoc fecit initium signorum
Iesus in Cana Galilaeae:
et manifestavit gloriam suam,
et crediderunt in eum discipuli
eius.</cell>
<cell>11. This beginning of miracles
did Jesus in Cana of Galilee:
and manifested his glory, and
his disciples believed in him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
11. This was Christ's first
miracle, or better perhaps, it
was His first <emph>public</emph> miracle,
the first <emph>sign</emph>, or proof given
in public of His Divine power.
It is worthy of note that our
Lord honoured marriage on
this occasion not only by His
presence, but also by His first
public miracle. The effect of
the miracle is carefully noted
by our Evangelist whose main
object, as we saw, is to prove
Christ's Divinity. And He manifested
His glory, δόξα (see <ref target='I_14'>i.
14</ref>); and the faith of the disciples
was <emph>confirmed</emph>. The fact
that they were disciples, shows
that they had some faith already.
</p>

<anchor id='II_12'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Post hoc descendit Capharnaum,
ipse, et mater eius,
et fratres eius; et discipuli eius:
et ibi manserunt non multis
diebus.</cell>
<cell>12. After this he went down
to Capharnaum, he and his
mother, and his brethren, and
his disciples: and they remained
there not many days.</cell></row></table>

<p>
12. <hi rend='bold'>Capharnaum</hi>, the largest
town of Galilee, was situated,
on the western shore of the sea
of Galilee (Matt. iv. 13, John
vi. 24), and the journey to it
from Cana is rightly described
as a descent. During His
public life our Lord seems to
have dwelt chiefly in this town,
which is therefore sometimes
spoken of as His own city (see
Matt. ix. 1, and compare with
Mark ii. 1). It was long thought
to be impossible to identify
the site of Capharnaum, but it
seems now to be practically
certain that the site is that of
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
the modern Tell Hûm, about
two and a half miles south-west
of the point where the Jordan
enters the sea of Galilee. Capharnaum
means the village
(נפר) of Nahum. <foreign lang='ar' rend='italic'>Tell</foreign> is the
Arabic for a hillock covered
with ruins, and it is reasonably
conjectured that Hûm is a contraction
for Nahum, the first
syllable, as sometimes happens
in such cases, being dropped.
Thus Tell Hûm would mean
the ruin-clad hillock of Nahum.
A summary of the various
reasons for identifying the two
places is given by Pére Didon,
in his able work: <hi rend='italic'>Jesus
Christ</hi>, vol. ii., Appendix F. The
<hi rend='bold'>brethren</hi> of the Lord here
referred to were His cousins,
but according to the Scriptural
usage any near relations are
called brethren. Thus Abraham
and Lot are <q>brethren</q> (Gen.
xiii. 8), though Abraham was
in reality Lot's uncle (Gen. xi.
27). See also remarks on <ref target='VII_3'>vii. 3</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>13. Et prope erat pascha
Iudaeorum, et ascendit Iesus
Ierosoloymam:</cell>
<cell>13. And the pasch of the
Jews was at hand, and Jesus
went up to Jerusalem.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. <hi rend='bold'>And</hi> (= for) <hi rend='bold'>the Pasch</hi>,
&amp;c. This was the first Pasch
of our Lord's public life. The
Evangelist calls it the Pasch
of the Jews, because he is
writing for the inhabitants of
Asia Minor, most of whom
were Greeks. The Pasch (Heb.
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>pesach</foreign>, פסח), beginning at
evening on the 14th, and ending
at evening on the 21st of
Nisan,<note place='foot'>Nisan, the first month of the sacred year of the Jews, corresponded to the
latter half of March and the first half of April.</note> was the greatest festival
of the Jews. The word <q>pasch</q>
means the passing over (from
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>pasach</foreign>, פסח, to pass or leap
over), and the name was given
to this festival as commemorating
the passing over of the
houses of the Israelites when
the destroying angel slew the
first-born in the land of Egypt
(see Exod xii. 11, 12).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And Jesus went up to
Jerusalem.</hi> At the three
principal feasts: Pasch, Pentecost,
and Tabernacles, all the
male adults were bound to
go up to the temple at Jerusalem.
</p>

<anchor id='II_14'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Et invenit in templo
vendentes boves, et oves, et
columbas, et numularios sedentes.</cell>
<cell>14. And he found in the
temple them that sold oxen
and sheep and doves, and the
changers of money sitting.</cell></row></table>

<p>
14. The animals here mentioned
were sold to be sacrificed.
The money-changers were there
to change foreign money into
Jewish. It was probably in the
Court of the Gentiles that
Christ found them. <hi rend='bold'>In the
temple</hi> (ἐν ἱερώ, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, in
sacro loco). The ἱερόν must
be carefully distinguished
from the ναός (v. 20). The
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
former included the temple
proper, and also its courts,
porches, and porticoes; in a
word, all its <emph>sacred</emph> precincts;
the latter was the temple
proper, the house of God, the
place where He <emph>dwelt</emph> (ναίω =
to dwell). We know that
around the temple as rebuilt by
Herod the Great, there were
three courts: the outer, or that
of the Gentiles; the inner, or
that of the Israelites; and
between them, on the eastern
side, the Court of the women.
In the inner court, or that of
the Israelites, there was a
portion next the temple proper
set apart for the priests.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>15. Et cum fecisset quasi
flagellum de funiculis, omnes
eiecit de templo, oves quoque,
et boves, et numulariorum
effudit aes, et mensas subvertit.</cell>
<cell>15. And when he had made
as it were a scourge of little
cords, he drove them all out of
the temple, the sheep also and
the oxen, and the money of
the changers he poured out,
and the tables he overthrew.</cell></row></table>

<p>
15. <hi rend='bold'>He drove them all out
of the temple, the sheep also
and the oxen.</hi> These words
of our version mean that He
drove out not only the animals,
but also the sellers, and this is
distinctly stated by S. Aug., and
several other Fathers. The sense
of the Greek is ambiguous: <hi rend='bold'>He
drove all out of the temple,
both the sheep and the oxen.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Et his qui columbas
vendebant, dixit: Auferte ista
hinc, et nolite facere domum
Patris mei, domum negotiationis.</cell>
<cell>16. And to them that sold
doves he said: Take these
things hence, and make not
the house of my father a house
of traffic.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. Christ deals more leniently
with those who sold the
doves, perhaps because these
were the offerings of the poor.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>A house of traffic.</hi> Our Lord
does not on this occasion say
the traffic was unjust, but implies
that it was sacrilegious,
as being carried on in a holy
place. On another occasion,
three years afterwards, Christ
again drove traders from the
temple, who He says had made
it <q>a den of thieves,</q> adding
the sin of injustice to that of
sacrilege (Matt. xxi. 13). Note
how He calls God His Father.
See <ref target='V_18'>v. 18</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Recordati sunt vero discipuli
eius, quia scriptum est:
Zelus domus tuae comedit
me.</cell>
<cell>17. And his disciples remembered
that it was written:
<hi rend='italic'>The zeal of thy house hath eaten
me up.</hi></cell></row></table>

<p>
17. Our Evangelist, mindful
of his scope in writing this
Gospel, draws attention to the
fulfilment of this prophecy of
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
the Psalmist, inasmuch as this
tends to prove that Jesus was
the Messias and the true God.
καταφάγεται (<emph>will eat</emph> me up)
is the true reading here, though
the Psalm has the prophetic past.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Responderunt ergo Iudaei,
et dixerunt ei: Quod
signum ostendis nobis, quia
haec facis?</cell>
<cell>18. The Jews therefore answered,
and said to him: What
sign dost thou show unto us,
seeing thou dost these things?</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. The Jews challenge
(<emph>answered</emph>, meaning here, as
frequently, <emph>went on to speak</emph>)
Christ for a proof of that authority
which He appeared to
claim for Himself in driving
them from the temple, and also
in calling God His Father (see
<ref target='V_17'>v. 17-18</ref>). The incident itself,
with so many men tamely
submitting to His action, was,
as Origen points out, one of
the most wonderful signs He
could have shown them. But
they hoped, as St. Chryst. remarks,
to put Him in a dilemma
by obliging Him either to work
a miracle on the spot, or else
cease to interfere with them.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Respondit Iesus, et dixit
eis: Solvite templum hoc,
et in tribus diebus excitabo
illud.</cell>
<cell>19. Jesus answered, and said
to them: Destroy this temple,
and in three days I will raise
it up.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. Instead of working a
miracle He merely refers darkly
to a future sign that was still
some years off, as He does on
a similar occasion, when dealing
with other unbelievers,
Matt. xii. 38-40. <q>He, however,</q>
says St. Chrys., <q>who even
anticipated men's wishes, and
gave signs when He was not
asked, would not have rejected
here a positive request, had He
not seen a crafty design in it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Standing as He was beside
Herod's temple, probably in the
Court of the Gentiles or immediately
outside it, His words,
<hi rend='bold'>Destroy this temple, and in
three days I will raise it up</hi>,
were understood by the Jews
(v. 20), and apparently by His
disciples (v. 22), in reference to
Herod's temple. Various views
have been put forward to show
that His words were not
necessarily misleading.
</p>

<p>
(1) It is said that He may
have pointed with His finger to
His body while He said: Destroy
this temple. But the fact
that He was actually misunderstood
by all seems to exclude
this hypothesis.
</p>

<p>
(2) It is held by many that He
spoke both of Herod's temple
and of His body. So, apparently,
Origen; and Cardinal
Wiseman says explicitly:
<q>Finally did our Lord speak
altogether of His resurrection
so as to exclude all allusion to
rebuilding the temple which
stood before Him? I must
confess that ... I cannot
read the passage without being
convinced that He spoke of
both</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Lect. on the Euch.</hi>,
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
p. 135, No. 4). We, however,
cannot bring ourselves to adopt
this view against what seems to
be the clear sense according to
the interpretation of the inspired
Evangelist, who tells us,
(v. 21), <hi rend='italic'>But He spoke of the
temple of His body</hi>.
</p>

<p>
(3) There is the common
answer, that He spoke ambiguously
and allowed them to
be deceived, because they were
unworthy of plainer speech.
They were not, however, necessarily
deceived, for ναός (a
temple) was used frequently
in reference to the human body
(see, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, 1 Cor. iii. 16, 17;
vi. 19; 2 Cor. vi. 16), and our
Lord's language might have
given them some reason for
suspecting that it was of His
body He spoke. For the two
verbs, which he used λύσατε
and ἐγερῶ though they could
be understood in reference to
the temple of stone, applied
more appropriately to His
body; the former signifying
the breaking up or <emph>loosing</emph> of
the union between His soul
and body; the latter, the raising
of the body to life, as so
often in St. Paul. See, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>,
1 Cor. xv. 4, 12, 14, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Destroy this temple</hi>, is
not, of course, a command to
put Him to death, but a permission
like what He said to
Judas: <hi rend='italic'>That which thou dost,
do quickly</hi> (John xiii. 27). It
was usual with the Prophets
to announce their predictions
in the form of a command; as,
for instance, Isaias (xlvii. 1):
<q>Come down, sit in the dust,
O virgin daughter of Babylon.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Dixerunt ergo Iudaei:
Quadraginta et sex annis aedificatum
est templum hoc, et tu
in tribus diebus excitabis illud?</cell>
<cell>20. The Jews then said:
Six and forty years was this
temple in building, and wilt
thou raise it up in three days?</cell></row></table>

<p>
20. The rebuilding of the
temple by Herod the Great is
said by Josephus, in Antiq. xv.
11, 1, to have been begun in the
eighteenth year of his reign;
in B. Jud. i. 21, 1, in the
fifteenth; the difference arising
from the fact that in one case
Josephus counts from the death
of Antigonus, in the other from
Herod's appointment by the
Romans. (See Antiq. xvii. 8, 1.)
Reckoning from the latter, we
have twenty years till the birth
of Christ, and thirty years
since that event, making fifty,
from which, however, four must
be subtracted, because our era
is four years too late. This
gives forty-six years. The
mere building of the temple
took only nine years and a
half, but during the remainder
of the time it was decorated.
These decorations were still
going on, and were not completed
till 64 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, so that the
Greek verb ought to get its proper
sense: <hi rend='italic'>has been</hi> in building.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>21. Ille autem dicebat de
templo corporis sui.</cell>
<cell>21. But he spoke of the
temple of his body.</cell></row></table>

<p>
21. The inspired Evangelist
here tells us that it was of His
body Christ spoke. He adds
the explanation to show, perhaps,
how utterly devoid of
all foundation in fact was the
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
distorted testimony of the false
witnesses, who on the night
before His death charged our
Lord with having threatened
to destroy the temple <hi rend='italic'>made
with hands</hi> (Matt. xxvi. 61;
Mark xiv. 58).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Cum ergo resurrexisset
a mortuis, recordati sunt discipuli
eius, quia hoc dicebat,
et crediderunt scripturae, et
sermoni quem dixit Iesus.</cell>
<cell>22. When therefore he was
risen again from the dead, his
disciples remembered that he
had said this, and they believed
the scripture, and the word
that Jesus had said.</cell></row></table>

<p>
22. When Christ had risen His
disciples understood the Scriptures,
or rather they believed that
they (see, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Psalms iii. 6; xv.
10), and Christ's present words,
referred to His resurrection.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Cum autem esset Ierosolymis
in pascha in die festo,
multi crediderunt in nomine
eius, videntes signa eius, quae
faciebat.</cell>
<cell>23. Now when he was at
Jerusalem at the pasch, upon
the festival day, many believed
in his name, seeing his signs
which he did.</cell></row></table>

<p>
23. <hi rend='bold'>Upon the festival day.</hi>
Rather during the festal time,
which, at the Pasch, lasted a
week, many believed in His
name, that is to say, in Him,
seeing the miracles which he
wrought, and which were
<emph>proofs</emph> of His divine power.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Ipse autem Iesus non
credebat semetipsum eis, eo
quod ipse nosset omnes.</cell>
<cell>24. But Jesus did not trust
himself unto them, for that he
knew all men.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. <hi rend='bold'>Unto them</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, all the
Jews, or perhaps those very
persons who believed in Him;
because, as searcher of hearts
(verse 25), He foresaw that
they would not remain faithful
followers.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Et quia opus ei non erat
ut quis testimonium perhiberet
de homine: ipse enim sciebat
quid esset in homine.</cell>
<cell>25. And because he needed
not that any should give testimony
of man: for he knew
what was in man.</cell></row></table>

<p>
25. He knew this, not by
any external indications, but
because He is the searcher of
hearts. This is noted as
another proof of Christ's
Divinity, because this knowledge
of the secrets of the
hearts of all men belongs to
God alone. See 3 Kings viii.
39; 1 Paral. xxviii. 9; Job
xlii. 2; Ps. vii. 10; Acts xv. 8.
Some of the saints in special
cases were able to read the
hearts of certain individuals,
but no one save God knows
the hearts of all.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-21. <hi rend='bold'>Nicodemus comes to Christ; their discourse.</hi>
</p>

<p>
22-36. <hi rend='bold'>Christ begins to baptize; complaints of the Baptist's disciples,
and testimony of the Baptist to Christ's divine origin, and to
the necessity of faith in Him.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<anchor id='III_1'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Erat autem homo ex
pharisaeis, Nicodemus nomine,
princeps Iudaeorum.</cell>
<cell>1. And there was a man of the
Pharisees, named Nicodemus,
a ruler of the Jews.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. This chapter is closely
connected with the end of the
preceding. Among the many
who believed (ii. 23) was <hi rend='bold'>a
man of the Pharisees</hi> (see
<ref target='I_24'>i. 24</ref>). The sect, name,
and dignity of the man are
mentioned, because of his importance,
and because of the
importance of the discourse
about to be narrated.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>A ruler of the Jews</hi>; that
is to say, as we gather from
vii. 45, 50, he was a member
of the Sanhedrim.
</p>

<anchor id='III_2'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. Hic venit ad Iesum nocte,
et dixit ei: Rabbi, scimus quia
a Deo venisti magister: nemo
enim potest haec signa facere
quae tu facis, nisi fuerit Deus
cum eo.</cell>
<cell>2. This man came to Jesus
by night, and said to him:
Rabbi, we know that thou art
come a teacher from God: for
no man can do these signs
which thou dost, unless God
be with him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. Because he believed in
Jesus, he came; but because
he feared the Jews, he came by
night.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>We know.</hi> Nicodemus may
have come in the name of
several, to learn more about
Jesus, or he may be merely
alluding to the fact that some
others were of the same belief.
He professed his faith in Jesus
as a heaven-sent teacher, stating
the nature of his belief.
<q>Nicodemus estimates accurately,
we may almost say with
theological precision, the force
of the evidence of the miracles
of our Lord, if they were to be
taken apart from other considerations
which belonged to
the same subject-matter. The
miracles <emph>in themselves</emph> proved
exactly that God was with
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
Him; but if they were taken
in conjunction with the witness
of St. John the Baptist, with
our Lord's manner of working
them, that is, <emph>as one who was
using His own power</emph>, and with
His way of speaking of Himself,
and of God as His Father,
they might have been enough
to form the ground of a still
higher faith concerning our
Blessed Lord</q> (Coleridge, <hi rend='italic'>Life
of our Lord</hi>, vol. i., page 256).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Respondit Iesus, et dixit
ei: Amen, amen, dico tibi,
nisi quis renatus fuerit denuo,
non potest videre regnum
Dei.</cell>
<cell>3. Jesus answered and said
to him: Amen, amen, I say to
thee, unless a man be born
again, he cannot see the kingdom
of God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus answered.</hi> This
might merely mean that He
went on to speak, the verb to
answer being again and again
found in this sense in the New
Testament. Here, however, it
may be used in its strict sense
of replying to a question, for it
seems to us extremely probable
that a portion of the discourse
leading up to the statement
made in verse 3 is omitted by
the Evangelist. It is highly
improbable that the whole discourse
between Christ and
Nicodemus is here recorded, as
it seems very unlikely that
Nicodemus, after the trouble
of coming specially to Christ
by night, left Him, or would
be allowed to leave, after the
two or three minutes in which
the discourse here reported was
spoken.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Born again.</hi> The Greek
word ἄνωθενα, which is rendered
<q>again,</q> may mean&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) from
above, or (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) again. The latter
meaning, however, is more
probable here, for so Nicodemus
understood our Lord's words
(see verse 4): so, also S.
Chrysostom, and nearly all the
Latin fathers. Compare, too,
Tit. iii. 5; 1 Pet. i. 23. The
truth expressed in this verse is
universal; whoever is born
needs to be reborn in order to
see (= <q>to enter into,</q> verse 5)
the kingdom of God in Christ's
Church here, and in heaven
hereafter.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Dicit ad eum Nicodemus:
Quomodo potest homo nasci,
cum sit senex? numquid
potest in ventrem matris suae
iterato introire, et renasci?</cell>
<cell>4. Nicodemus saith to him:
How can a man be born when
he is old? can he enter a
second time into his mother's
womb, and be born again?</cell></row></table>

<p>
4. Nicodemus either understood
our Lord to speak of a
second carnal birth; or perhaps,
not understanding the words at
all, he may have pretended to
misunderstand, in order to get
Christ to explain. His motive,
at all events, was good&mdash;to
obtain light and instruction.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. Respondit Iesus: Amen,
amen dico tibi, nisi quis renatus
fuerit ex aqua et Spiritu sancto,
non potest intriore in regnum
Dei.</cell>
<cell>5. Jesus answered: Amen
amen, I say to thee, unless a
man be born again of water
and the Holy Ghost, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
5. Hence Christ goes on to
give a more precise statement
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
of the truth contained in verse
3, with an additional explanation
regarding the means of
regeneration under the new
dispensation.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Amen, Amen.</hi> This formula
indicates the importance of the
pronouncement. It has been
defined by the Council of
Trent&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) that there is question
in this fifth verse of natural
water, and (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) of that natural
water as necessary for Baptism.
<q>Si quis dixerit aquam veram
et naturalem non esse de necessitate
baptismi, atque ideo verba
illa D. N. J. C.: <q>Nisi quis renatus
fuerit ex aqua, et Spiritu
Sancto,</q> ad metaphoram aliquam
detorserit, anathema sit</q>
(Sess. vii. Can. 2. De bapt.).
</p>

<p>
This solemn declaration of the
infallible Church settles, for
Catholics, the question as to
whether there is reference here
to Christian Baptism. But even
against heretics, for whom the
Council of Trent speaks in vain,
it is not difficult to show that
there must be reference here to
<emph>Christian Baptism</emph>. For (1) it
cannot be denied that Christ inaugurated
some external rite of
baptism (John iii. 25, 26; iv.
11). (2) Christ and His disciples
are represented (verse 22) as
beginning to baptize after this
discourse with Nicodemus.
(3) Every circumstance of this
second birth spoken of to
Nicodemus is found in Christian
Baptism. (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Here we are said
to be born again; so, too, are
we in Baptism:&mdash;<q>According to
His mercy He saved us by the
laver of <emph>regeneration</emph> and renovation
of the Holy Ghost</q> (Tit.
iii. 5). (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) This second birth is
necessary that we may be saved
and enter the kingdom of God;
so is Christian Baptism (Mark
xvi. 16; Acts iii. 37, 38), (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>)
This second birth is through
water and the Holy Ghost; so
is Baptism. See Acts viii. 36-47;
Tit. iii. 5.
</p>

<p>
Seeing that there is reference
in the text to Christian Baptism,
the word <q>water</q> in the text,
as the Council of Trent defined,
is to be understood, not
metaphorically, but literally.
Moreover, since this new birth
is attributed to the water as to
the Holy Ghost <q>(ex aqua et
Spiritu Sancto</q>), water is not
merely an empty symbol in the
sacrament, but an efficient
cause of grace like the Holy
Ghost; He being the principal,
the water the instrumental,
efficient cause.
</p>

<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>

<p>
This new birth in Baptism
implies&mdash;(1) that we die to the
old man of sin, <q>for we are
buried together with Him by
Baptism into death</q> (Rom. vi.
4). It implies (2) that we are
born through the divine gift of
God's grace to a new and
spiritual life, in which we are
His adopted children. <q>So do
you also reckon that you are
dead to sin, but <emph>alive</emph> unto God
in Christ Jesus our Lord</q>
(Rom. vi. 11).
</p>

<p>
We may remark, before
passing from this text&mdash;(1)
against the Pelagians and Anabaptists,
that Baptism is here
declared necessary for all who
have been born, and therefore
for infants before the use of
reason; (2) against the Calvinists
and Socinians, who hold
that children of Christian
parents need not be baptized,
that no exception is here made
in favour of the children of
Christians; (3) against Protestants,
that water in Baptism
is not a mere symbol of regeneration,
but is as truly its
efficient cause as the Holy Ghost
Himself; with this difference,
however, that whereas the water
is the instrumental, the Holy
Ghost is the principal, cause.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Quod natum est ex carne,
caro est: et quod natum est
ex spiritu, spiritus est.</cell>
<cell>6. That which is born of the
flesh, is flesh: and that which
is born of the Spirit, is spirit.</cell></row></table>

<p>
6. Christ explains why the
agent of the regeneration of
which He speaks must be the
Holy Ghost. What is born of
man (flesh here is taken
for human nature without
grace), is merely human; what
is born of the Holy Ghost, is
spiritual, and partakes of the
Divine (2 Pet. i. 4). Since,
then, the new life to which a
man must be born again is
spiritual, a spiritual and supernatural
principle is required.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Non mireris quia dixi
tibi: Oportet vos nasci denuo.</cell>
<cell>7. Wonder not, that I said to
thee, you must be born again.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. Wonder not, therefore,
that I said to you: ye must be
born again, for if that which is
born of the flesh is flesh, certainly
you need a new birth to
be born to a life which is so
far above the flesh.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>8. Spiritus ubi vult spirat:
et vocen eius audis, sed nescis
unde veniat, aut quo vadat:
sic est omnis qui natus est ex
spiritu.</cell>
<cell>8. The Spirit breatheth
where he will: and thou
hearest his voice, but thou
knowest not whence he cometh,
and whither he goeth: so is
every one that is born of the
Spirit.</cell></row></table>

<p>
8. Christ goes on to show
how a difficulty in knowing the
way in which the regeneration
takes place is no proof of its
impossibility, nor a reason for
incredulity regarding its possibility.
The sense of this verse
depends upon the meaning
given to the first <q>spirit,</q> τὸ
πνεῦμα. Some understand this
of the Holy Ghost. The Holy
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
Ghost acts in men according to
His own good pleasure; <q>you
hear His voice that cannot be
mistaken&mdash;its power, its sweetness,
the peace which it breathes,
the light which it pours on you;
but you cannot tell that He is
approaching, or when He will
come, or how He will work on
your soul; <emph>in such manner</emph> is
it that everyone is born of the
Spirit who is so born</q>
(Coleridge, <hi rend='italic'>Public Life of our
Lord</hi>, vol. i., page 262). Others
understand the first spirit here
of the wind; and this is the
more common opinion among
commentators. In this view,
by means of a simple and
obvious illustration from
nature, Christ shows Nicodemus
that he must believe in
the possibility of this second
birth, even though he know
not the manner in which it
takes place. The wind bloweth
where it listeth, and you know
not whence it cometh or whither
it goeth: <emph>so is it</emph> in regeneration;
you are regenerated,
though you cannot comprehend
the process. That πνεῦμα
sometimes means wind in
Biblical Greek, is undeniable
(see, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Gen. vii. 1; Ps. civ.
4; Matt. xxiv. 31; Heb. i. 7),
and the use of the word here in
different senses is plain from
the comparison (<hi rend='bold'>so is it</hi>, &amp;c.),
according to the patrons of
this second opinion. Nor does
the fact that it is preceded by
the article here oblige us,
according to these, to refer it
to the Holy Ghost; for, just as
in verse 5, without the article,
it refers to the Holy Ghost, so
here, with the article, it may
not refer to Him.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>9. Respondit Nicodemus, et
dixit ei: Quomodo possunt
haec fieri?</cell>
<cell>9. Nicodemus answered, and
said to him: How can these
things be done?</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Respondit Iesus, et dixit
ei: Tu es magister in Israel,
et haec ignoras?</cell>
<cell>10. Jesus answered, and
said to him: Art thou a master
in Israel, and knowest not
these things?</cell></row></table>

<p>
9, 10. Nicodemus again asks
how these things can come to
pass, and Jesus gently upbraids
him for his ignorance. As one
of the chief teachers of Israel
ὁ διδάσκαλος<note place='foot'><q>Additus ibi voci διδάσκαλος articulus Nicodemum exhibet tanquam ex
Israelis doctoribus <emph>excellentibus unum</emph>.</q>&mdash;Beel., <hi rend='italic'>Gr. Gram.</hi>, § 17, 4, adnot 3.</note> (see also <ref target='VII_45'>vii.
45-50</ref>), one of the seventy-one
members of the Sanhedrim, or
supreme Council of the Jews,
he should be familiar with the
Sacred Scriptures, and ought
to have read in them the
promise of a spiritual regeneration.
See Ezech. xxxvi. 25;
Zach. xiii. 1.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. Amen, amen, dico tibi,
quia quod scimus loquimur, et
quod vidimus testamur, et
testimonium nostrum non accipitis.</cell>
<cell>11. Amen, amen I say to
thee, that we speak what we
know, and we testify what we
have seen, and you receive not
our testimony.</cell></row></table>

<p>
11. Christ continues using
the solemn form of asseveration.
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
<hi rend='bold'>What we know.</hi> The
plural is used not of Himself
and the Holy Spirit, nor of
Himself and the Prophets, nor
of all born of the Spirit, nor
of the Three Persons of the
Trinity, but simply as a plural
of majesty. <hi rend='bold'>What we have
seen.</hi> Sight, says St. Chrys.
on this verse, we consider the
most certain of all the senses,
so that when we say we saw such
a thing with our eyes, we seem
to compel men to believe us.
In like manner, Christ, speaking
after the manner of men,
does not indeed mean that He
has seen actually with the
bodily eye the mysteries He
reveals, but it is manifest that
He means He has the most
certain and absolute (and we
may add, immediate: see above
on <ref target='I_18'>i. 18</ref>) knowledge of them.
In these words, then, Christ
insists upon His authority to
teach, and His claim to be
believed.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Si terrena dixi vobis, et
non creditis: quomodo, si
dixero vobis coelestia, credetis?</cell>
<cell>12. If I have spoken to you
earthly things, and you believe
not: how will you believe if I
shall speak to you heavenly
things?</cell></row></table>

<p>
12. If you will not believe
Me when I teach you the comparatively
elementary doctrine
of Baptism, which regards the
regeneration of man here on
earth, how shall you believe if
I go on to speak of truths more
sublime, more removed from
the realms of sense and human
comprehension? The spiritual
vision of Nicodemus was hardly
able to bear the first ray of
truth; how then was it to bear
the full flood of the light of
higher revelation?
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>13. Et nemo ascendit in
coelum, nisi qui descendit de
coelo, Filius hominis, qui est
in coelo.</cell>
<cell>13. And no man hath
ascended into heaven, but he
that descended from heaven, the
son of man who is in heaven.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. The meaning is: No one
was in heaven except Him who
has descended from heaven,
and now speaks to you; namely,
the Son of Man, who still
remains in heaven. In this
view, which is that of St.
Thomas, Toletus, and Beelen,
Christ speaks of Himself as
<emph>having ascended</emph> into heaven
only to accommodate His language
to human ideas, which
conceive of <emph>ascent</emph> to heaven as
necessary, in order to our being
there. The Son of Man, <hi rend='bold'>as
Son of God</hi>, had, of course,
been there from all eternity
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
and needed not to ascend. Some
think that Christ here begins
to explain the <q>heavenly
things</q> referred to in the preceding
verse; but a more
probable connection is the following:&mdash;He
had said: how
shall you believe heavenly things
from Me since you question
even the elementary truths
which I tell you? And yet from
Me alone you must learn such
things, for no one else has been
in heaven, so as to know and
be able to teach you the
mysteries of God.
</p>

<anchor id='III_14'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Et sicut Moyses exaltavit
serpentem in deserto, ita
exaltarioportet Filium hominis:</cell>
<cell>14. And as Moses lifted up the
serpent in the desert, so must
the son of man be lifted up:</cell></row>
<row><cell>15. Ut omnis, qui credit in
ipsum, non pereat, sed habeat
vitam aeternam.</cell>
<cell>15. That whosoever believeth
in him, may not perish, but
may have life everlasting.</cell></row></table>

<p>
14, 15. Christ now goes on
to speak of some of the more
sublime doctrines. As Moses
raised up the serpent, upon
which whosoever looked was
healed (Numbers xxi. 4-9), so
must Christ be lifted up on the
cross (see John <ref target='VIII_28'>viii. 28</ref>; <ref target='XII_32'>xii.
32-34</ref>), to save those who believe
in Him. The best supported
Greek reading of verse
15 would be rendered:&mdash;<hi rend='bold'>That
everyone who believes may,
through him, have eternal
life</hi>; μὴ ἀπόληται αλλ᾽ (may not
perish, but) not being genuine,
and ἐν αὐτώ standing instead
of εἰς αὐτόν. Though faith
is the only condition to salvation
which is mentioned in verse 15,
others are supposed, as is
evident from verse 5:&mdash;<q>Unless
a man be born again.</q> &amp;c.
Faith, however, is often
specially referred to, because
as the Council of Trent (Sess.
vi., c. 8) says:&mdash;<q>Fides est
humanae salutis initium, fundamentum,
et radix omnis
justificationis.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Sic enim Deus dilexit
mundum, ut Filium suum
unigenitum daret: ut omnis,
qui credit in eum, non pereat,
sed habeat vitam aeternam.</cell>
<cell>16. For God so loved the
world, as to give his only
begotten Son; that whosoever
believeth in him, may not
perish, but may have life everlasting.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. Some commentators, following
Erasmus, hold that
what follows to the end of verse
21, is not the language of
Christ, but a comment of the
Evangelist; but more probably
Christ still continues. The
boundless love of God for the
world, and not merely for the
elect, is declared to be the
cause of the incarnation, and
the world's salvation its object.
It was this love that made
God give His <hi rend='italic'>only-begotten
Son</hi> to suffer for men and save
them.
</p>

<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>

<anchor id='III_17'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Non enim misit Deus
Filium suum in mundum, ut
iudicet mundum, sed ut salvetur
mundus per ipsum.</cell>
<cell>17. For God sent not his
Son, into the world, to judge
the world, but that the world
may be saved by him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17. For it was to save, not to
judge the world, that the Son
of God came at His first coming.
Hereafter in His second coming
He will come to judge
and to condemn (the context
proves there is question of the
judgment of condemnation).
</p>

<anchor id='III_18'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Qui credit in eum, non
iudicatur: qui autem non
credit, iam iudicatus est, quia
non credit in nomine unigeniti
Filii Dei.</cell>
<cell>18. He that believeth in
him is not judged. But he
that doth not believe is already
judged: because he believeth
not in the name of the only
begotten Son of God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. He who believeth in Christ
escapes the judgment of condemnation;
but he who
believeth not is already condemned,
because, inasmuch as
he has not believed, <q>the
wrath of God,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, original sin
(Eph. ii. 3) and its effects in
actual sin, remain upon him
(verse 36); and he has rejected
the only means whereby he
could be delivered from them.
It is as it a physician were sent
to the sick, says St. Augustine,
they who come to him are
cured; they who come not,
perish; not through him, however,
but because of their
disease.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Hoc est autem iudicium:
quia lux venit in mundum, et
dilexerunt homines magis
tenebras quam lucem: erant
enim eorum mala opera.</cell>
<cell>19. And this is the judgment:
because the light is
come into the world, and men
loved darkness rather than the
light: for their works were evil.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. This is the <emph>reason</emph> of the
condemnation, namely, that men
do not come to the light, but
rather shrink from it, through
the fear of being forced by an
awakened conscience to abandon
sin.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Omnis enim qui male
agit, odit lucem, et non venit
ad lucem, ut non arguantur
opera eius:</cell>
<cell>20. For every one that doth
evil hateth the light, and
cometh not to the light, that
his works may not be reproved:</cell></row></table>

<p>
20. <hi rend='bold'>For every one that doth
evil</hi>, and, as St. Chrys. explains
determines to <hi rend='italic'>remain</hi> in his
wickedness, <hi rend='bold'>hateth the light,
and cometh not to the light,
that his works may not be
reproved</hi>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>21. Qui autem facit veritatem, venit ad lucem, ut
manifestentur opera eius, quia
in Deo sunt facta.</cell>
<cell>21. But he that doth truth, cometh to the light, that his
works may be made manifest,
because they are done in God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
21. <hi rend='bold'>But he that doth the
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
truth</hi>; that is to say, what
truth directs, or rather the
practical truth of good works,
for right action is the realization
of true thought, <hi rend='bold'>cometh
to the light</hi>, by accepting the
faith of Christ, by believing
(v. 18). <hi rend='bold'>That his works may
be made manifest.</hi> Just as he
who does evil, and intends to
persist in it, shuns the light, in
order that his works may not
be reproved (v. 20), so he who
does good, and means to persevere
in it, comes to the light
and believes, in order that his
works may be approved. The
antithesis between this and the
preceding verse, shows that
the manifestation of which
there is question here is equivalent
to approval; and indeed,
from the nature of the case,
the manifestation of such
works in the light of Christian
truth would be necessarily
followed by their approval, not
only by God, but also by the
enlightened judgment of him
who wrought them.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Because</hi> (ὅτι) <hi rend='bold'>they are done</hi>
(Gr. <hi rend='italic'>have been done</hi>) <hi rend='bold'>in God</hi>.
These words may be differently
connected. They may give the
reason why he who does
good, readily comes to
the light, namely, because
his works have been good,
and he is not afraid to have
them tested. Or, they might
be understood to give the
reason why such a one's
works are approved, namely
because they are done in God.
Or again, ὅτι may be taken
to mean not, <q>because,</q> but
<q>that;</q> and then the sense
will be, that he who does good
comes to the light and believes,
that his works may be made
manifest as having been (that
they have been) done in God.
The last is perhaps the simplest
and most natural interpretation,
but the first also is probable.
</p>

<p>
But in any of these interpretations,
the question arises&mdash;how
can the works of a man
who has not yet believed, be
said to have been <q>done in
God.</q> Various answers have
been given. We cannot agree
with those commentators who
reply that there is question of
future works to be performed
after the reception of faith;
for the whole context, and the
Greek text (<hi rend='italic'>have been</hi> done),
show that there is question of
past works done before their
author has come to the light.
Nor do we think that there is
question merely of natural
works done in the past with
the aid of medicinal grace, for
such works would scarcely be
said to have been <q>done in
God.</q> We hold, then, that
there is reference to the <q>initium
fidei,</q> that is to say, to
all those works that sprang
from supernatural grace, were
salutary in themselves, and
led up to faith. These are the
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
only works of one who has
not yet believed, that can be
properly said to have been
done in God, done according
to His will and pleasure. That
there are such works antecedent
to faith, cannot be denied;
for the proposition: <q>Faith
is the first grace,</q> put forward
in the schismatical Council of
Pistoia, was condemned by
Pius VI., in the Bull <hi rend='italic'>Auctorem
Fidei</hi>. Besides, it is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de fide</foreign>,
against the Semipelagians,
that supernatural grace is
necessary for the <q>initium
fidei,</q> from which it follows
that the works included in the
<q>initium fidei,</q> are salutary,
and <q>done in God.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Post haec venit Iesus,
et discipuli eius, in terram
Iudaeam: et illic demorabatur
cum eis, et baptizabat.</cell>
<cell>22. After these things Jesus
and his disciples came into
the land of Judea; and there
he abode with them and
baptized.</cell></row></table>

<p>
22. <hi rend='bold'>After these things</hi>; that
is to say, after this discourse with
Nicodemus. How long our
Lord remained in Jerusalem on
the occasion of this first Pasch,
we know not. By <hi rend='bold'>the land of
Judea</hi>, is meant the country
parts of that province, as distinguished
from the city of
Jerusalem, where the discourse
with Nicodemus had taken
place. In these country parts,
then, Jesus baptized through
His disciples (iv. 2), the baptism
most probably being sacramental.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Erat autem et Ioannes
baptizans in Aennon, iuxta
Salim: quia aquae multae
erant illic, et veniebant, et
baptizabantur.</cell>
<cell>23. And John also was
baptizing in Ennon near Salim;
because there was much water
there, and they came, and
were baptized.</cell></row></table>

<p>
23. <hi rend='bold'>Ennon, near Salim.</hi>
The site of Aennon (Gr. Αἰνών,
from a Chaldaic word meaning
springs) is difficult to determine.
If we compare verse 26
of this chapter with John i. 28,
it would seem that Aennon was
west of the Jordan. Eusebius
and Jerome place it eight
miles south of Scythopolis,
<q>juxta Salim et Jordanem;</q>
and the latter states that the
ruins of Melchizedek's palace
existed in his day at Salim.
These statements are so positive
that they cannot lightly
be set aside. In the Jordan
valley, about seven and a-half
miles from Beisan (Scythopolis),
there is a remarkable
group of seven springs, all
lying within a radius of a
quarter of a mile, which answers
well to the description
<q>many waters.</q><note place='foot'>Smith's <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of the Bible</hi>, 2nd edition, 1893.</note> According
to this view, Aennon was
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
situated in the north-east
corner of Samaria. Others,
however, think, from the connection
between this verse and
verse 22, in which Jesus is said
to baptize in Judea, that Aennon
also was in Judea, and refer to
Josue xv. 32, where the cities
of Selim and <foreign rend='italic'>Aen</foreign> are mentioned
as in the tribe of Juda.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Nondum enim missus
fuerat Ioannes in carcerem.</cell>
<cell>24. For John was not yet
cast into prison.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. The Evangelist notes
that the Baptist had not yet
been imprisoned, probably lest
it should be thought, from
Matt. iv. 11, 12, that the
imprisonment of the Baptist
followed at once upon the
return of Christ from the forty
days' fast in the desert. This
verse, therefore, affords a strong
proof that our Evangelist was
acquainted with the Gospel of
St. Matthew.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Facta est autem quaestio
ex discipulis Ioannis cum
Iudaeis de purificatione.</cell>
<cell>25. And there arose a
question between some of
John's disciples and the Jews
concerning purification:</cell></row>
<row><cell>26. Et venerunt ad Ioannem,
et dixerunt ei: Rabbi, qui erat
tecum trans Iordanem, cui tu
testimonium perhibuisti, ecce
hic baptizat, et omnes veniunt
ad eum.</cell>
<cell>26. And they came to John,
and said to him: Rabbi, he
that was with thee beyond the
Jordan, to whom thou gavest
testimony, behold he baptizeth,
and all men come to him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
25, 26. A question arose
between (ἐκ τῶν μαθητῶν Ἰωάννου
μετα Ἰονδαίου, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, <q>cujus auctores
extitere discipuli Joannis,</q>
Beel, <hi rend='italic'>Gr. Gram.</hi>, § 51, B. 2, 8)
John's disciples and <hi rend='italic'>the Jews</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, some leading Jews, perhaps
members of the Sanhedrim,
concerning the relative merits
of John's baptism and Christ's;
and John's disciples come to
their master, jealous that his
fame is being eclipsed by that
of Him whom he had been the
means of bringing before the
public notice. The best supported
reading is <hi rend='italic'>a Jew</hi>, not
the Jews.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>27. Respondit Ioannes, et
dixit: Non potest homo accipere
quidquam, nisi fuerit ei
datum de coelo.</cell>
<cell>27. John answered and said:
A man cannot receive anything,
unless it be given him from
heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell>28. Ipsi vos mihi testimonium
perhibetis, quod dixerim: Non
sum ego Christus, sed quia
missus sum ante illum.</cell>
<cell>28. You yourselves do bear
me witness, that I said, I am
not Christ, but that I am sent
before him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
27, 28. John's answer to his
disciples is his last recorded
testimony to Christ. It is to
the effect that a man may not
arrogate to himself power or
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
office unless he have authority
from God, and that his own
office is merely that of precursor
to the Messias.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>29. Qui habet sponsam,
sponsus est: amicus autem
sponsi, qui stat, et audit eum,
gaudio gaudet propter vocem
sponsi. Hoc ergo gaudium
meum impletum est.</cell>
<cell>29. He that hath the bride,
is the bridegroom: but the
friend of the bridegroom, who
standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth
with joy because of the
bridegroom's voice. This my
joy therefore is fulfilled.</cell></row></table>

<p>
29. By a familiar example
the Baptist illustrates the difference
between himself and
Christ. On the occasion of a
Jewish marriage it was usual
for the bridegroom to have a
friend (<q>amicus sponsi,</q> corresponding
to the παράνυμφος
of the Greeks), whose duty it
was to arrange the preliminaries
to the marriage, and at
the marriage feast to minister
to the bridegroom. The sense
of the Baptist's words then is,
that though many are present
to a wedding, only one, he
who hath the bride, is the
bridegroom. His friend, who
has helped to bring about the
marriage, is satisfied to stand
and minister to him, rejoicing
exceedingly to hear the bridegroom
speaking with his bride,
nor jealous of the happy relations
which subsist between
them. <hi rend='bold'>This, my joy, therefore,
is fulfilled.</hi> In these
words the Baptist points the
application of the comparison
to Christ and himself. The
Baptist is the <q>amicus sponsi,</q>
who prepared the disciples for
Christ; Christ is the bridegroom,
and the disciples flocking
to Christ (verse 26) were
to constitute the Church, which
is His spouse. See 2 Cor. xi. 2;
Eph. v. 25, 27.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>30. Illum oportet crescere,
me autem minui.</cell>
<cell>30. He must increase, but I
must decrease.</cell></row></table>

<p>
30. John had fulfilled his
mission; thenceforward, therefore,
whereas Christ, in virtue
of His nature, and His office of
Messias, should increase, the
Baptist himself should decrease,
in influence and fame.
</p>

<anchor id='III_31'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>31. Qui desursum venit,
super omnes est. Qui est de
terra, de terra est, et de terra
loquitur. Qui de coelo venit,
super omnes est.</cell>
<cell>31. He that cometh from
above, is above all. He that
is of the earth, of the earth he
is, and of the earth he speaketh.
He that cometh from heaven,
is above all.</cell></row></table>

<p>
31. He that hath a divine
origin is above all men, and so
above me; but He that is of
the earth by origin, of the
earth he is in nature, and of
the earth He speaks (compare
verse 6). This is true of all
men, in comparison with Christ:
their thoughts are earthly,
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
weak, and limited; His divine
and inexhaustible; but it is
also true absolutely, if we
consider them apart from faith
and grace. <q>Hoc autem in
Joanne verum est primo, si
ejus nudam naturam spectes,
et seclusa Dei gratia, vocatione,
et revelatione: sic enim
Joannes non nisi terreus et
terrenus erat, nec nisi terrena
sapiebat; quia <q>si quid divinum
audisti a Joanne illuminantis
est, non recipientis,</q> ait
St. Augustinus, quasi dicat, id
accepit a Deo, non habet a
se</q> (A Lap.).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>32. Et quod vidit, et audivit,
hoc testatur: et testimonium,
eius nemo accipit.</cell>
<cell>32. And what he hath seen
and heard, that he testifieth:
and no man receiveth his testimony.</cell></row></table>

<p>
32. What Christ knoweth of
His own <emph>immediate</emph> divine
knowledge, as being <q>in the
bosom of the Father</q> (i. 18),
this He testifieth; and yet
hardly anyone (<q>no man</q>
being an hyperbole) receiveth
His testimony. Christ is metaphorically
spoken of here as
seeing and hearing, to indicate
His direct and <emph>immediate</emph>
knowledge of things divine.
Compare v. 19; vi. 46; viii. 38;
xv. 15; xvi. 13.
</p>

<p>
According to Patrizzi and
others, this and the following
verses are the words of the
Evangelist; but more probably
the Baptist continues to the
end of the chapter, developing
the reason why Christ must
increase.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>33. Qui accepit eius testimonium,
signavit quia Deus
verax est.</cell>
<cell>33. He that hath received
his testimony, hath set to his
seal that God is true.</cell></row></table>

<p>
33. He who has believed in
Christ has thereby testified
solemnly (as though he set his
<emph>seal</emph> to the testimony) that God
is truthful. <hi rend='bold'>God</hi> here refers to
the Father; and the meaning
is, that by believing what Christ
teaches, we believe Him to be
truthful, and therefore believe
the Father also, from whom He
has received His divine nature
and knowledge, and His mission
as Messias, to be truthful.
This is better than to refer God
here to the Son (Christ), as
Maldonatus does; for in the
next verse, which proves this,
God plainly refers to the
Father.
</p>

<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>34. Quem enim misit Deus,
verba Dei loquitur: non enim
ad mensuram dat Deus spiritum.</cell>
<cell>34. For he whom God hath
sent, speaketh the words of
God: for God doth not give
the spirit by measure.</cell></row></table>

<p>
34. <hi rend='bold'>For he whom God</hi>
(the Father) <hi rend='bold'>hath sent</hi> (<hi rend='bold'>as
His Son</hi>, verse 35), as the
Messias, <hi rend='bold'>speaketh the words
of God, for God doth not
give the spirit by measure</hi>.
The contrast is between the
abundant gift of the Spirit to
Christ, as man, and the stinted
participation of the same Spirit
by those who are merely of the
earth (Rom. xii. 3; 1 Cor. xii.
14). The sense, then, is, that
the gifts of the Holy Spirit
were poured out in abundance
on Christ as man; that <q>He
unceasingly possessed them all
at once to the greatest extent
of which human nature is
capable</q> (M'Ev.); and this
plenitude of the gifts of the
Holy Ghost within Him is the
reason why He speaks the
words of God.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>35. Pater diligit Filium: et
omnia dedit in manu eius.</cell>
<cell>35. The Father loveth the
Son: and he hath given all
things into his hand.</cell></row></table>

<p>
35. This plenitude of the
Spirit in Christ, this fulness of
grace and truth (i. 16, 17), in
Christ as man, is the effect of
the love of the Father for His
Incarnate Son, which love has
also caused the Father to
grant to Christ, as <emph>man</emph>, the
<emph>bestowal</emph> (He hath given all
things <hi rend='bold'>into His hand</hi>) of all
the gifts of the Spirit required
for the salvation of men.
</p>

<anchor id='III_36'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>36. Qui credit in Filium habet
vitam aeternam: qui autem
incredulus est Filio, non
videbit vitam, sed ira Dei
manet super eum.</cell>
<cell>36. He that believeth in the
Son, hath life everlasting: but
he that believeth not the Son,
shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abideth on him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
36. Since, then, Jesus Christ
has been constituted our help
unto salvation, he that believes
<emph>in Him</emph> as Son of God (and acts
accordingly) hath eternal life
begun in him by justification;
he that believeth not, &amp;c. See
<ref target='III_18'>verse 18</ref>.
</p>

<p>
This splendid testimony of
the Baptist in favour of Christ
was intended to detach his
disciples from himself, and
win them to Christ, of whom,
as we learn from verse 26,
they had shown themselves
jealous.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-4. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus sets out from Judea to Galilee.</hi>
</p>

<p>
5-26. <hi rend='bold'>Arrival in Sichar, and discourse with the Samaritan woman.</hi>
</p>

<p>
27-38. <hi rend='bold'>Discourse with the disciples.</hi>
</p>

<p>
39-42. <hi rend='bold'>Stay with the people of Sichar.</hi>
</p>

<p>
43-54. Continuation of the journey into Galilee, and healing of the
ruler's son.
</p>

</quote>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Ut ergo cognovit Iesus
quia audierunt pharisaei quod
Iesus plures discipulos facit,
et baptizat, quam Ioannes,</cell>
<cell>1. When Jesus therefore
understood that the Pharisees
had heard that Jesus maketh
more disciples, and baptizeth
<hi rend='italic'>more</hi> than John,</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. <hi rend='bold'>When Jesus therefore
understood</hi>, &amp;c. Christ is
spoken of as if on this occasion
He gained knowledge of which
He had been ignorant, because
though, as God, He knew all
things, every inmost thought of
the Pharisees, yet, <emph>as man</emph>,
like other men, He gathered
knowledge from His fellow-men.
See Mald.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>That Jesus.</hi> Not that He
Himself; because the report
which the Pharisees had heard
is given verbatim, <q>that</q>
(ὅτι) merely introducing it.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. (Quamquam Iesus non
baptizaret sed discipuli eius,)</cell>
<cell>2. (Though Jesus <emph>himself</emph> did
not baptize, but his disciples,)</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. Jesus Himself did not
usually baptize; probably
because, like St. Paul (1 Cor.
i. 14-16), His mission was to
preach and teach. It by no
means follows from this verse
that He never baptized anyone;
and many writers are of
opinion that He baptized some
Himself.
</p>

<anchor id='IV_3'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Reliquit Iudaeam, et abiit
iterum in Galilaeam;</cell>
<cell>3. He left Judea, and went
again into Galilee.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. Because His time to suffer
had not yet come, and much of
the work of His public mission
still remained to be accomplished,
He left Judea, the
headquarters of the Pharisees,
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
whose jealousy He knew would
be aroused by the report mentioned
in verse 1, and went
again (see John <ref target='I_43'>i. 43</ref>) into
Galilee.
</p>

<anchor id='IV_4'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Oportebat autem eum
transire per Samariam.</cell>
<cell>4. And he was of necessity
to pass through Samaria.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Venit ergo in civitatem
Samariae, quae dicitur Sichar:
iuxta praedium quod dedit Iacob
Ioseph filio suo.</cell>
<cell>5. He cometh therefore to a
city of Samaria which is called
Sichar; near the land which
Jacob gave to his son Joseph.</cell></row></table>

<p>
4, 5. Not choosing to cross
to the east of the Jordan, and
go up through Peraea, as some
of the stricter Jews did, who
wished to avoid all possible
contact with the Samaritans,
He was obliged to pass through
Samaria. Of the three provinces
of Palestine west of the
Jordan, Samaria was in the
centre, with Judea to the south,
and Galilee to the north. <q>St.
John is thus careful to note that
this was no mission to the
Samaritans which the Lord
undertook. On the contrary,
the law which He imposed on
His disciples: <q>And into any
city of the Samaritans enter
ye not</q> (Matt. x. 5), this, during
the days of His flesh, He imposed
also on Himself. He was
not sent <q>but to the lost sheep
of the house of Israel</q> (Matt.
xv. 24; Acts xiii. 46); and if
any grace reached Samaritan
or heathen, it was, so to speak,
but by accident, a crumb falling
from the children's table.</q><note place='foot'>Trench, <hi rend='italic'>Studies in the Gospels</hi>, p. 84.</note>
Samaria had been the portion of
the tribe of Ephraim and of
half the tribe of Manasses.
The province derived its name
from its chief city, Samaria,
which, in turn, got its name
from Mount Somer (or Semer),
on which it was built (3 Kings
xvi. 24). See A Lap. The
city called Sichar<note place='foot'>The name Sichar is derived by some from <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>shikkor</foreign> (שׂכר), a drunkard; by
others <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>sheqquer</foreign> (שׂקר), a liar; the city of liars, perhaps of <emph>false</emph> worship.</note> (the modern
Nabulus) by St. John is the
ancient Sichem, where Abram
built an altar to the Lord (Gen.
xii. 7), under the turpentine
tree behind which Jacob buried
the idols of his household (Gen.
xxxv. 4), and where the bones
of the twelve patriarchs were
laid to rest (Acts vii. 16).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Near the land which Jacob
gave to his son Joseph.</hi> See
Gen. xxxviii. 18, 19; Josue
xxiv. 32.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Erat autem ibi fons Iacob,
Iesus ergo fatigatus ex itinere, sedebat sic supra fontem. Hora
erat quasi sexta.</cell>
<cell>6. Now Jacob's well was
there. Jesus therefore being wearied with his journey, sat
thus on the well. It was
about the sixth hour.</cell></row></table>

<p>
6. <hi rend='bold'>Jacob's well</hi>, which he
had dug or bought, was there;
and Jesus, weary because of His
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
journey, sat <emph>thus</emph> (<hi rend='italic'>sic.</hi>, <q>hoc
est, fatigatus ut erat,</q> Beel.) by
the well.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>It was about the sixth
hour.</hi> See on <ref target='I_39'>i. 39</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Venit mulier de Samaria
haurire aquam. Dicit ei Iesus:
Da mihi bibere.</cell>
<cell>7. There cometh a woman of
Samaria to draw water. Jesus
saith to her: Give me to drink.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. There cometh a woman of
Samaria, not of the city of
Samaria, for that was six miles
distant, but of the country of
Samaria, a Samaritan woman,
to draw water.<note place='foot'><q>Venit mulier ad puteum et fontem quem non speravit invenit.</q>&mdash;St.
Aug.</note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>8. (Discipuli enim eius
abierant in civitatem ut cibos
emerent.)</cell>
<cell>8. For his disciples were
gone into the city to buy
meats.</cell></row></table>

<p>
8. Because He had no one
else to give Him to drink, He
asks her to do so, and thus
leads up naturally to the following
discourse.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>9. Dicit ergo ei mulier illa
Samaritana: Quomodo tu
Iudaeus cum sis, bibere a me
poscis, quae sum mulier Samaritana?
non enim coutuntur
Iudaei Samaritanis.</cell>
<cell>9. Then that Samaritan
woman saith to him: How
dost thou, being a Jew, ask
of me to drink, who am a
Samaritan woman? For the
Jews do not communicate
with the Samaritans.</cell></row></table>

<p>
9. The Samaritans, with
whom, as here stated, the Jews
avoided all intercourse, were
either pure Assyrians or a
mixture of Jews and Assyrians,
at best a mongrel race. Very
probably some Jews were left
behind in Samaria at the time
of the Assyrian captivity, under
Salmanassar, 721 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>; and from
these intermarrying with the
imported Easterns sprang the
Samaritans. The Jews regarded
the Samaritans with
special aversion for many
reasons. They were the descendants
of the Assyrian
conquerors; they held what
was the rightful inheritance of
the Jews; they corrupted Jewish
worship; they endeavoured to
prevent the rebuilding of the
Temple under Zorobabel (1
Esd. iv. 2, 7, 8), and were
always prepared to harbour the
false friends or open enemies of
the Jews. Hence this woman,
recognising in Christ's dress
and accent His Jewish origin,
wonders that He would speak
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
to, much less drink from, a
Samaritan. The last clause:
<hi rend='bold'>For the Jews do not communicate
with the Samaritans</hi>,
is added by the Evangelist as
an explanation of the woman's
question for Gentile readers.
</p>

<anchor id='IV_10'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>10. Respondit Iesus, et dixit
ei: Si scires donum Dei, et
quis est qui dicit tibi, Da mihi
bibere; tu forsitan petisses ab
eo, et dedisset tibi aquam
vivam.</cell>
<cell>10. Jesus answered and said
to her: If thou didst know the
gift of God, and who he is
that saith to thee, Give me to
drink; thou perhaps wouldst
have asked of him, and he
would have given thee living
water.</cell></row></table>

<p>
10. <hi rend='bold'>The gift of God</hi> is not
the Holy Ghost, nor Christ
Himself, nor the opportunity
now offered her, but most
probably the gift of grace, the
<q>living water</q> spoken of in
the end of the verse. Hence
Christ's words mean: If you
knew that there is a spiritual
water which slakes the thirst of
man in the desert of this world,
and that He who can bestow it
speaks to you, <hi rend='bold'>thou perhaps
wouldst have asked</hi>, &amp;c.
<hi rend='bold'>Perhaps</hi> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>forsitan</foreign>) is not represented
in the Greek, in which
we have an ordinary conditional
sentence; and certainly Christ
knew without doubt what
would have been the result.
The Vulgate translator, probably
added <q>forsitan</q> to
indicate that she would still be
<emph>free</emph> to reject the grace offered.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Living water.</hi> There is
the same diversity of opinion
here as in regard to the <q>gift
of God,</q> with the addition that
some have held the reference
here to be to the waters of
baptism. We take it that the
reference again is to grace.
Living water properly signifies
<emph>running water</emph>, in opposition
to the stagnant water of pools
or cisterns. Here, however
the words seem to be used in
their highest sense, of waters
which come from God and
bestow <emph>life</emph> upon all who drink
of them.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. Dicit ei mulier: Domine,
neque in quo haurias habes,
et puteus altus est: unde ergo
habes aquam vivam?</cell>
<cell>11. The woman saith to
him: Sir, thou hast nothing
wherein to draw, and the well
is deep: from whence then
hast thou living water?</cell></row>
<row><cell>12. Numquid tu maior es
patre nostro Iacob, qui dedit
nobis puteum, et ipse ex eo
bibit, et filii eius, et pecora
eius?</cell>
<cell>12. Art thou greater than
our father Jacob, who gave us
the well, and drank thereof
himself, and his children, and
his cattle?</cell></row></table>

<p>
11, 12. She understands Him
to speak of natural water,
which He seemed to think
superior to that of Jacob's well;
and, concluding that He must
refer to the water of some other
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
well, since indeed He had no
bucket, no means of drawing
from the deep well at which
she stood, she asks Him: Art
Thou greater than our father
Jacob, so as to be able to provide
a better water than he
provided for us in this well?
That its waters were good
enough for him and his sons,
is a proof of their excellence;
that they sufficed for all
his household and cattle, is
evidence of their abundance.
There is a tinge of resentment
in the words of verse 12, for
the Samaritans claimed descent
from Jacob (<hi rend='bold'>our father,
Jacob</hi>), through Joseph and
Joseph's sons, Ephraim and
Manasses, whose tribal territory
they possessed, and this
Jewish Stranger seemed to the
woman to set Himself above
the great Patriarch of her
race.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>13. Respondit Iesus, et dixit
ei: Omnis qui bibit ex aqua
hac, sitiet iterum: qui autem
biberit ex aqua quam ego
dabo ei, non sitiet in aeternum:</cell>
<cell>13. Jesus answered, and
said to her: Whosoever
drinketh of this water, shall
thirst again: but he that shall
drink of the water that I will
give him, shall not thirst for
ever.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. Without replying explicitly
that He was indeed greater
than Jacob, Christ implies this
by declaring that the water
which He will give is superior
to that of Jacob's well. For
while the latter only satisfies
present wants, that which He
will give will quench present
and prevent future thirst. What
is said in Eccl. xxiv. 29: <q>They
that drink Me shall yet thirst,</q>
is not opposed to our Lord's
words here; for in Ecclesiasticus
there is question of
desire springing from love,
here of a craving arising from
want. These words of our
Lord show, then, that sanctifying
grace is of its own nature
perennial in the soul. Time
does not wear it away; use does
not consume it; unless it be
expelled, it never departs:
<q>He that drinks ... shall
not thirst for ever.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Sed aqua, quam ego
dabo ei, fiet in eo fons aquae
salientis in vitam aeternam.</cell>
<cell>14. But the water that I will
give him, shall become in him
a fountain of water springing
up into life everlasting.</cell></row></table>

<p>
14. But so far from thirsting,
he shall have that within
him, that is, the Holy Ghost
and His graces, which will conduct
him to eternal life. In
this beautiful metaphor, the
spiritual water of grace is
represented as finding its own
level; coming from heaven, it
will return thither in those
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
whom it has saved. The mention
of <hi rend='bold'>eternal life</hi> ought to
have made it clear that Christ
spoke of supernatural and
spiritual water.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>15. Dicit ad eum mulier:
Domine, da mihi hanc aquam,
ut non sitiam, neque veniam
huc haurire.</cell>
<cell>15. The woman saith to
him: Sir, give me this water,
that I may not thirst, nor
come hither to draw.</cell></row></table>

<p>
15. Yet she probably still
understands of Him merely
natural water, <q>Adhuc carnalis
est mulier</q> (Mald.): and anticipates
only relief from having
come to Jacob's well in
future.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Dicit ei Iesus: Vade,
voca virum tuum, et veni huc.</cell>
<cell>16. Jesus saith to her: Go,
call thy husband, and come
hither.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. Christ, of course, knew
she had no husband; but He
knew also what answer she
would give, and He wished to
get a natural opportunity of
disclosing to her the secrets of
her wicked life, that He might
manifest His supernatural
knowledge.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Respondit mulier, et
dixit: Non habeo virum. Dicit
ei Iesus: Bene dixisti, quia
non habeo virum:</cell>
<cell>17. The woman answered,
and said: I have no husband.
Jesus said to her: Thou hast
said well, I have no husband:</cell></row>
<row><cell>18. Quinque enim viros
habuisti: et nunc quem habes,
non est tuus vir: hoc vere
dixisti.</cell>
<cell>18. For thou hast had five
husbands: and he whom thou
now hast, is not thy husband.
This thou hast said truly.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17, 18. <hi rend='bold'>Thou hast well said,
I have no husband</hi>, or rather,
<emph>husband</emph> I have not, with an
emphasis on husband, which is
marked in the Greek by its
position in the sentence, as
reproduced by Christ.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thou hast had five husbands.</hi>
Though St. Chrys.
and Mald. think that there is
question, not of husbands, but
of paramours, the common
opinion, and certainly the
obvious one, is that husbands
are spoken of. It is not necessary
to suppose that the husbands
made room for one
another by death, for she may
have been divorced by several
of them. See Deut. xxiv. 1, 2;
Matt. xix. 3.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Dicit ei mulier: Domine, video quia propheta es
tu.</cell>
<cell>19. The woman saith to him:
Sir, I perceive that thou art a
prophet.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. <hi rend='bold'>A prophet</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, here,
as elsewhere frequently, one
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
who has supernatural knowledge,
who knows things which
are naturally hidden from him.
In these words the poor woman
confesses her own guilt and
the exalted character of Christ,
whom, however, she does not
yet recognise as <q><emph>The</emph> Prophet,</q>
the Messias, but only as a
prophet.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Patres nostri in monte
hoc adoraverunt, et vos dicitis,
quia Ierosolymis est locus ubi
adorare oportet.</cell>
<cell>20. Our fathers adored on
this mountain, and you say
that at Jerusalem is the place
where men must adore.</cell></row></table>

<p>
20. Not so much for the
purpose of turning the conversation
from the unpleasant
subject of her own character,<note place='foot'>Massillon, in a beautiful Lenten Sermon on this subject, says: <q>Nouvelle
artifice, dont elle s'avise pour détourner la question de ses mœurs, qui lui
déplait, et qui l'embarasse, elle se jette habiliment sur une question de
doctrine.</q></note>
as in order to have the opinion
of a prophet upon an important
question, she adds: <hi rend='bold'>Our
fathers</hi>, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
She says that her Samaritan
ancestors had worshipped on
that mountain. She evidently
refers to public worship, public
ceremonies appointed by God,
especially the worship of <hi rend='bold'>sacrifice</hi>;
for the Jews never held
that private worship, as of
prayer, should be restricted to
Jerusalem. The mountain to
which she refers, and beneath
the shadow of which Christ
and she were standing, is
Mount Garizim, which overhangs
the town of Sichar. In
the time of Alexander the
Great, Manasses, a Jewish
priest, was excluded from the
exercise of his ministry for
marrying the daughter of the
king of Sichem. The king
accordingly built for Manasses
a temple on Mount Garizim,
where he offered sacrifice to
the true God. This temple was
built about 330 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, and stood
for two hundred years. After
it was destroyed, about 130 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>,
the Samaritans erected an altar
upon Garizim, and continued
to offer sacrifice there; so that
from the time of Manasses the
true God was worshipped,
though imperfectly, among
them. There still remain a
few families of Samaritans,
under the shadow of Mount
Garizim, in the modern city of
Nabulus, or Naplouse.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>21. Dicit ei Iesus: Mulier
crede mihi, quia venit hora
quando neque in monte hoc,
neque Ierosolymis adorabitis
Patrem.</cell>
<cell>21. Jesus saith to her:
Woman, believe me, that the
hour cometh, when you shall
neither on this mountain, nor
in Jerusalem adore the Father.</cell></row></table>

<p>
21. Christ declares with all
solemnity that the time is at
hand&mdash;nay, already come (see
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
verse <ref target='IV_23'>23</ref>), when true worship
<emph>shall be restricted</emph> neither to
Jerusalem nor to Garizim; and
hence her question is practically
unimportant.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Vos adoratis quod
nescitis: nos adoramus quod
scimus, quia salus ex Iudaeis
est.</cell>
<cell>22. You adore that which
you know not: we adore that
which we know; for salvation
is of the Jews.</cell></row></table>

<p>
22. <hi rend='bold'>You adore that which</hi>
(ὅ) <hi rend='bold'>you know not</hi>. As the
woman's inquiry regarded not
the object, but the place of
worship, some have understood
these words of our
Lord in reference to the place,
as if He said: You adore in a
place for worshipping in which
you have no Divine sanction,
we in a place pointed out by
the finger of God. But it is difficult
to reconcile this view with
our Lord's words: <q>You adore
<emph>that which</emph> you know not.</q>
Hence it is more probable,
that in replying to her inquiry,
He takes occasion to refer to
the imperfect knowledge of
God, possessed by Samaritans.
The neuter (ὅ) seems
to be used in the first instance,
to show the want of personality
and definiteness in the
Samaritan idea of God,<note place='foot'>Compare Acts xvii. 23, where the true reading is ὃ οὖν, agreeing with the
Vulgate.</note> and
in the second instance merely
for the sake of correspondence
between the two members of
the sentence. <hi rend='bold'>We adore.</hi>
That Christ numbers Himself
among those who adore,
merely proves that He had a
human nature.
</p>

<anchor id='IV_23'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Sed venit hora, et nunc
est, quando veri adoratores
adorabunt Patrem in spiritu et
veritate. Nam et Pater tales
quaerit, qui adorent eum.</cell>
<cell>23. But the hour cometh,
and now is, when the true
adorers shall adore the Father
in spirit and in truth. For
the Father also seeketh such
to adore him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
23. Still, though this is so,
not even to Jerusalem, shall
worship be restricted in the
future; <hi rend='bold'>but the hour cometh</hi>,
&amp;c.
</p>

<p>
What is the adoration <hi rend='bold'>in
spirit and in truth</hi>, here foretold?
Evidently the worship
of the new dispensation, as
contrasted with that of the
old; this is plain from the
whole context. What, then,
is meant by saying that the
worship of the new dispensation
is to be <hi rend='bold'>in spirit and in
truth</hi>? Various interpretations
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
of the words have been
given.
</p>

<p>
(1) <q>In spirit</q> is opposed
to the worship of the Jews;
<q>in truth</q> to that of the
Samaritans. Hence the worship
of the new dispensation
is to be, <emph>not merely external</emph>,
as was the Jewish (unless it
was accompanied by faith in
the Redeemer to come, in which
case it was not merely Jewish,
but Christian), nor <emph>false</emph>, as
was the Samaritan. (Toletus.)
</p>

<p>
(2) <q>In spirit</q> is opposed
to all merely external and local
worship, whether of <emph>Jews</emph> or
<emph>Samaritans</emph>; <q>in truth</q> to the
<emph>typical</emph> and imperfect worship
of the Jews. For the Jewish
sacrifices and ceremonies were
only shadows and types of the
realities in the New Law. <q>For
the law having a shadow of
the good things to come, not
the very image (reality) of the
things: by the selfsame sacrifices
which they offer continually
every year, can never
make the comers thereunto
perfect</q> (Heb. x. 1), Mald., who
favours next opinion also.
</p>

<p>
(3) <q>In spirit</q> and <q>in
truth</q> are synonymous, and
signify true supernatural worship,
springing from faith and
grace, and hence opposed to
all imperfect or false worship.
This opinion, considered equally
probable with the preceding by
Maldonatus, and held by Beelen
and Corluy, we prefer; for in
verse 24, the fact that God is a
Spirit (it is not stated that He
is also Truth) is given as the
reason why He should be worshipped
in <emph>both</emph> spirit and truth.
</p>

<p>
The distinguishing features
of true Christian worship, indicated
in verses 21, 23, are that
it is to be <emph>universal</emph>, not restricted,
like the Jewish or
Samaritan, to Jerusalem or
Garizim; and <emph>spiritual</emph>, offered
with hearts animated by faith
and grace, and not consisting
merely in external rites.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Spiritus est Deus: et
eos, qui adorant eum, in spiritu
et veritate oportet adorare.</cell>
<cell>24. God is a Spirit, and they
that adore him, must adore
him in spirit and in truth.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. In the end of verse 23
and in this verse Christ
goes on to give the reasons
why this worship, which is
primarily spiritual, is to exist
in the new and more perfect
dispensation&mdash;(1). It is the
Father's will. (2) It is meet
that such should be the worship
paid to Him who is Himself a
Spirit. It is hardly necessary
to point out that Calvin's interpretation
of adoration by faith
alone cannot be admitted.
Were that sufficient, the devils
themselves would be true
adorers, for <q>the devils also
believe and tremble</q> (James ii.
19). Neither does Christ here
imply that all <emph>external</emph> worship,
external rites and ceremonies,
were to cease, but only that
they were to cease to be <emph>merely
external</emph>; else (1) His acts
would contradict His words,
Luke xxii. 41; xxiv. 50; (2)
His Apostles would distinctly
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
disobey Him: see Acts xvi. 25;
ix. 40: Eph. iii. 14; (3) His
Church <emph>in every age</emph> has misunderstood
Him.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Dicit ei mulier: Scio
quia Messias venit (qui dicitur
Christus): cum ergo venerit
ille, nobis annuntiabit omnia.</cell>
<cell>25. The woman saith to
him: I know that the Messias
cometh (who is called Christ),
therefore when he is come, he
will tell us all things.</cell></row></table>

<p>
25. The poor woman, apparently
bewildered by what Christ
had just said, is satisfied to
wait in confidence till Messias
(here without the article, used
as a proper name) shall come,
who, she believes, will make
known all that it is necessary to
know regarding the place and
character of the worship of the
true God. As the Samaritans
admitted only the Pentateuch,
where the term Messias is not
used (though His coming is
foretold, Deut. xviii. 18); as,
moreover, she could not have
gathered from the Pentateuch
the <emph>time</emph> of His coming, she must
have learned by rumour that
the Jews were <emph>at this time</emph> expecting
the Messias; her words,
<q>He will tell <emph>us</emph> all things,</q>
showed that she hoped for His
coming in her own day.
</p>

<p>
It is difficult to say whether
the words explanatory of
Messias, <hi rend='bold'>who is called Christ</hi>,
are the woman's or our Evangelist's.
That the Evangelist
explained the term before (i. 41),
is not a proof that he does not
do so again, for see John <ref target='XI_16'>xi.
16</ref>; <ref target='XII_24'>xx. 24</ref>; <ref target='XXI_2'>xxi. 2</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>26. Dicit ei Iesus: Ego
sum, qui loquor tecum.</cell>
<cell>26. Jesus saith to her: I am
he who am speaking with thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>27. Et continuo venerunt
discipuli eius: et mirabantur,
quia cum muliere loquebatur.
Nemo tamen dixit: Quid
quaeris, aut quid loqueris cum
ea?</cell>
<cell>27. And immediately his
disciples came: and they
wondered that he talked with
the woman. Yet no man said:
What seekest thou, or why
talkest thou with her?</cell></row></table>

<p>
26, 27. At length Christ reveals
Himself; and now that
He has excited her interest and
awakened her faith, the disciples
return from Sichar, and are
astonished to find Him speaking
publicly with a woman&mdash;a thing
not usually done by Jewish
doctors.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>28. Reliquit ergo hydriam
suam mulier, et abiit in civitatem,
et dicit illis hominibus:</cell>
<cell>28. The woman therefore
left her waterpot, and went
her way into the city, and
saith to the men there:</cell></row>
<row><cell>29. Venite, et videte hominem
qui dixit mihi omnia quaecumque
feci: numquid ipse
est Christus?</cell>
<cell>29. Come, and see a man
who has told me all things
whatsoever I have done. Is
not he the Christ?</cell></row>
<row><cell>30. Exierunt ergo de civitate,
et veniebant ad eum.</cell>
<cell>30. They went therefore out
of the city, and came unto him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
28-30. The discourse being
interrupted by the arrival of the
disciples, the woman, forgetful or
indifferent regarding the errand
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
which had brought her to the
well, <hi rend='bold'>went her way into the
city</hi>, and soon returned with a
number of her fellow-citizens.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>31. Interea rogabant eum
discipuli, dicentes: Rabbi,
manduca.</cell>
<cell>31. In the meantime the
disciples prayed him, saying:
Rabbi, eat.</cell></row>
<row><cell>32. Ille autem dicit eis: Ego
cibum habeo manducare, quem
vos nescitis.</cell>
<cell>32. But he said to them:
I have meat to eat which you
know not.</cell></row>
<row><cell>33. Dicebant ergo discipuli
ad invicem: Numquid aliquis
attulit ei manducare?</cell>
<cell>33. The disciples therefore
said one to another: Hath
any man brought him to eat?</cell></row>
<row><cell>34. Dicit eis Iesus: Meus
cibus est ut faciam voluntatem
eius qui misit me, ut perficiam
opus eius.</cell>
<cell>34. Jesus saith to them:
My meat is to do the will of
him that sent me, that I may
perfect his work.</cell></row></table>

<p>
31-34. Meanwhile the disciples
invite Jesus to eat, to
whom He replies that He has
meat to eat which they know
not, that meat being, as He
explains in verse 34, to do the
will of Him that sent Him. It
was no time for attending to
the wants of His human nature;
He had more serious work in
hand in the conversion of the
Samaritans.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>35. Nonne vos dicitis quod
adhuc quatuor menses sunt,
et messis venit? Ecce dico
vobis: Levate oculos vestros,
et videte regiones, quia albae
sunt iam ad messem.</cell>
<cell>35. Do not you say, there
are yet four months, and then
the harvest cometh? Behold
I say to you, lift up your eyes,
and see the countries, for they
are white already to harvest.</cell></row></table>

<p>
35. <hi rend='bold'>There are yet four
months, and then the harvest
cometh.</hi> Maldonatus, followed
by Father Coleridge, takes this
to be a proverb<note place='foot'>Compare the saying, common in parts of Ireland: <q>It is long till
Hallow-day.</q></note> meaning that
there is no need of hurry&mdash;that
the matter in question is still
far off. As, however, there is
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
no evidence that such a proverb
was current among the Jews,
it is much better to understand
the verse thus: You say what
is true, that it is still four
months till the harvest of
nature; but lift up your eyes,
and behold the harvest of grace
in the men of Sichar who are
approaching.
</p>

<p>
As the barley harvest in
Palestine came in about the
middle of April, this time, four
months earlier, was the middle
of December, the end of the first
year of our Lord's public life.<note place='foot'>Our Lord was probably baptized by John between the middle of October
and the 25th December: <q>Quae quum ita sint, dies baptismi fuerit oportet
inter medium Octobrem interque viii. Kal., Januar,</q> Patrizzi, <hi rend='italic'>Diss.</hi> xlvii.,
c. i. 11.</note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>36. Et qui metit, mercedem
accipit, et congregat fructum
in vitam aeternam: ut, et qui
seminat, simul gaudeat, et qui
metit.</cell>
<cell>36. And he that reapeth
receiveth wages, and gathereth
fruit unto life everlasting: that
both he that soweth, and he
that reapeth, may rejoice
together.</cell></row></table>

<p>
36. He encourages His disciples
to the work; in saving
others they save themselves.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>37. In hoc enim est verbum
verum: quia alius est qui
seminat, et alius est qui metit.</cell>
<cell>37. For in this is the saying
true: that it is one man that
soweth, and it is another that
reapeth.</cell></row>
<row><cell>38. Ego misi vos metere
quod vos non laborastis: alii
laboraverunt, et vos in labores:
eorum introistis.</cell>
<cell>38. I have sent you to reap
that in which you did not
labour: others have laboured,
and you have entered into
their labours.</cell></row></table>

<p>
37-38. The Prophets and
Doctors of the old Law had
prepared the way for the
Apostles and disciples of
Christ; had ploughed and sown
where they were now to reap.
<hi rend='bold'>I have sent you.</hi> Mald., who
holds that this is not the same
journey with that referred to
in Matt. iv. 12, Mark i. 14, and
that the Apostles were already
formally called by Christ,
understands <q>I have sent</q> of
an action already completed
by Christ. As, however, it is
more probable that the Apostles
were not yet formally called
(see Matt. iv. 12, 18; x. 1), it
is better to understand this,
with A Lap., of the Divine
decree to send the Apostles on
their mission afterwards.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>39. Ex civitate autem illa
multi crediderunt in eum Samaritanorum, propter verbum
mulieris testimonium perhibentis:
Quia dixit mihi omnia
quaecumque feci.</cell>
<cell>39. Now of that city many
of the Samaritans believed in
him, for the word of the
woman giving testimony: He
told me all things whatsoever
I have done.</cell></row>
<row><cell>40. Cum venissent ergo ad
illum Samaritani, rogaverunt
eum ut ibi maneret. Et mansit
ibi duos dies.</cell>
<cell>40. So when the Samaritans
were come to him, they desired
him that he would tarry there.
And he abode there two days.</cell></row>
<row><cell>41. Et multo plures crediderunt
in eum propter sermonem
eius.</cell>
<cell>41. And many more believed
in him because of his own
word.</cell></row></table>

<p>
39-41. Many believed in Him
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
on account of what the woman
told them, and, after He had
remained two days in Sichar,
many more on account of His
discourses.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>42. Et mulieri dicebant:
Quia iam non propter tuam
loquelam credimus: ipsi enim
audivimus, et scimus, quia hic
est vere Salvator mundi.</cell>
<cell>42. And they said to the
woman: we now believe, not
for thy saying: for we ourselves
have heard him, and
know that this is indeed the
Saviour of the world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
42. This is the Hebrew way
of expressing that it was not <emph>so
much</emph> on account of the woman's
saying, as because they had
heard Him themselves.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>43. Post duos autem dies
exiit inde: et abiit in Galilaeam.</cell>
<cell>43. Now after two days he
departed thence: and went
into Galilee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>44. Ipse enim Iesus testimonium
perhibuit, quia propheta
in sua patria honorem
non habet.</cell>
<cell>44. For Jesus himself gave
testimony that a prophet hath
no honour in his own country.</cell></row></table>

<p>
43-44. The connection between
these two verses is
obscure. (1) Verse 44 gives
the reason why He had <emph>left
Galilee</emph>, to which He now
returns; or (2) the reason why
He <emph>passes Nazareth</emph>, and goes
on to Capharnaum (Matt. iv.
13), Tolet, A Lap., Corl.; or
(3) the reason why He proceeded
on His way from <emph>Judea,
His birthplace</emph>, into Galilee,
Mald., Patriz.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>45. Cum ergo venisset in
Galilaeam, exceperunt eum
Galilaei, cum omnia vidissent
quae fecerat Ierosolymis in
die festo: et ipsi enim venerant
ad diem festum.</cell>
<cell>45. And when he was come
into Galilee, the Galileans received
him, having seen all
the things he had done at
Jerusalem on the festival day:
for they also went to the
festival day.</cell></row></table>

<p>
45. He is well received by
the Galileans, because the
remembrance of His exercise of
authority and of His miracles,
on the occasion of the previous
Pasch (ii. 15, 23), is still fresh
in their memories.
</p>

<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>46. Venit ergo iterum in
Cana Galilaeae ubi fecit aquam
vinum. Et erat quidam regulus,
cuius filius infirmabatur
Capharnaum.</cell>
<cell>46. He came again therefore
into Cana of Galilee, where he
made the water wine. And
there was a certain ruler whose
son was sick at Capharnaum.</cell></row>
<row><cell>47. Hic cum audisset quia
Iesus adveniret a Iudaea in
Galilaeam, abiit ad eum, et
rogabat eum ut descenderet,
et sanaret filium eius: incipiebat
enim mori.</cell>
<cell>47. He having heard that
Jesus was come from Judea
into Galilee, went to him, and
prayed him to come down and
heal his son: for he was at the
point of death.</cell></row></table>

<p>
46. <hi rend='bold'>A certain ruler whose
son was sick at Capharnaum</hi>,
on hearing that Jesus was in
Cana, came and asked Him to
<emph>come down</emph> and heal his son,
who was on the point of death.
Origen thinks this ruler may
have belonged to the household
of Cæsar, and been on duty in
Palestine at this time. But
Josephus uses the word
(βασιλικός) to designate the
courtiers or officers of the
Herods (see B. J. vii. 5, 2;
Antt. xv. 8, 4); so that this
ruler of Capharnaum may have
been an officer of Herod
Antipas, the Tetrarch of
Galilee. Doubtless the ruler
had heard of the miracle at the
marriage feast in Cana (ii. 7,
11); and perhaps he had witnessed
the evidence of Christ's
miraculous power at the feast
of the Pasch (ii. 23).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>48. Dixit ergo Iesus ad
eum: Nisi signa et prodigia
videritis, non creditis.</cell>
<cell>48. Jesus therefore said to
him: Unless you see signs
and wonders, you believe not.</cell></row>
<row><cell>49. Dicit ad eum regulus:
Domine, descende prius quam
moriatur filius meus.</cell>
<cell>49. The ruler saith to him:
Lord, come down before that
my son die.</cell></row></table>

<p>
48. Christ upbraids the ruler
for his imperfect faith. The
ruler is blamed either because
he was waiting to <emph>see</emph> a miracle
before he would believe, or
because he foolishly considered
that it was <emph>necessary</emph> for Christ
to go down to Capharnaum in
order to heal his son.
</p>

<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>50. Dicit ei Iesus: Vade,
filius tuus vivit. Credidit
homo sermoni quem dixit ei
Iesus, et ibat.</cell>
<cell>50. Jesus saith to him: Go
thy way, thy son liveth. The
man believed the word which
Jesus said to him, and went
his way.</cell></row>
<row><cell>51. Iam autem eo descendente,
servi occurrerunt ei,
et nuntiaverunt dicentes, quia
filius eius viveret.</cell>
<cell>51. And as he was going
down, his servants met him:
and they brought word, saying
that his son lived.</cell></row></table>

<p>
50. Jesus said to him, <hi rend='bold'>Go
thy way; thy son liveth</hi>.
It is plain, from all the circumstances,
that this miracle is
quite distinct from that
recorded in Matt. viii. 5 and
foll.; Luke vii. 2 and foll.,
though some of the Rationalists
have sought to identify the
two. There it is the centurion's
servant, here the ruler's son,
who is ill; there the illness is
paralysis, here fever; there,
though asked not to go, Christ
goes to the sick person; here,
though asked to go, he goes
not.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>52. Interrogabat ergo horam
ab eis in qua melius habuerit.
Et dixerunt ei: Quia heri hora
septima reliquit eum febris.</cell>
<cell>52. He asked therefore of
them the hour, wherein he
grew better. And they said
to him: Yesterday at the
seventh hour the fever left him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
52. <hi rend='bold'>The seventh hour;</hi> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
about an hour after noon,
1 p.m., or 7 p.m. See <ref target='I_39'>i. 39</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>53. Cognovit ergo pater,
quia illa hora erat, in qua
dixit ei Iesus: Filius tuus
vivit: et credidit ipse, et
domus eius tota.</cell>
<cell>53. The father therefore
knew that it was at the same
hour, that Jesus said to him,
Thy son liveth; and himself
believed and his whole house.</cell></row>
<row><cell>54. Hoc iterum secundum
signum fecit Iesus, cum venisset
a Iudaea in Galilaeam.</cell>
<cell>54. This <hi rend='italic'>is</hi> again the second
miracle that Jesus did, when
he was come out of Judea into
Galilee.</cell></row></table>

<p>
54. It is not said that this
was the second miracle He
performed, but that it was
the second He performed
on coming out of Judea
into Galilee. For the first,
see ii. <ref target='II_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='II_11'>11</ref>, and compare
<ref target='I_43'>i. 43</ref>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-9. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus goes up to Jerusalem on the occasion of a festival, and
there cures a man on the Sabbath day.</hi>
</p>

<p>
10-16. <hi rend='bold'>The Jews first challenge him who was healed, and then persecute
Christ for violating the Sabbath.</hi>
</p>

<p>
17. <hi rend='bold'>Christ's answer and defence.</hi>
</p>

<p>
18. <hi rend='bold'>They are still more exasperated, and seek to kill Him.</hi>
</p>

<p>
19-39. <hi rend='bold'>Christ's discourse, in which He proves, by various arguments,
that He is justified in calling God HIS Father, and in making
Himself equal to God.</hi>
</p>

<p>
40-47. <hi rend='bold'>He upbraids their incredulity, and points out its cause.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Post haec erat dies festus
Iudaeorum, et ascendit Iesus
Ierosolymam.</cell>
<cell>1. After these things was a
festival day of the Jews, and
Jesus went up to Jerusalem.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. The interval to be admitted
between the events now
about to be narrated and the
preceding, depends upon the
answer to be given to the
question: what festival is here
referred to? On this question
a great diversity of opinion has
always existed among commentators.
The more common
opinion is that it is the festival
of the <foreign rend='italic'>Pasch</foreign>; others, however,
hold that it is the festival of
<hi rend='italic'>Pentecost</hi>, or of <hi rend='italic'>Tabernacles</hi>, or
of the <hi rend='italic'>Purification</hi> of the
Temple, or of <hi rend='italic'>Lots</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The Pasch was celebrated
from the evening of the 14th
till that of the 21st of Nisan,
the first month of the Jewish
sacred year. Pentecost was
the fiftieth day from the second
day of the Pasch. The feast of
Tabernacles was celebrated
from the evening of the 14th
till that of the 22nd of Tisri, the
seventh month of the sacred
year. The feast of Purification
lasted eight days, beginning
with the 25th Casleu, the ninth
month of the sacred year. The
feast of Lots lasted two days,
the 14th and 15th of Adar, the
twelfth month of the sacred
year.
</p>

<p>
The three feasts of Pasch,
Pentecost, and Tabernacles
were the great Jewish feasts,
on which, and on which alone,
all adult males were bound to
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
go up to Jerusalem to worship.
See Exod. xxiii. 14-17; xxxiv.
18, 22, 23. Many have held
that the approach of the feast
is mentioned (verse 1), as giving
the reason why Christ went up,
like the other adult Jewish men,
to Jerusalem (ii. 13). Others,
however, hold that the text
merely states a fact, that Christ
went up on the occasion of a
festival, without implying at all
that the festival was such as
ought to be celebrated at Jerusalem.
</p>

<p>
It is difficult, if not impossible,
to definitely decide which
feast is meant; but it seems to
us extremely probable that it is
either Pasch or Lots. In favour
of the Pasch it is argued&mdash;(1)
(ἑορτὴ) even without the
article<note place='foot'>It is not certain which is the correct reading, whether ἑορτὴ or
ἡ ἑορτὴ (a feast, or <emph>the</emph> feast). Nearly all the critics are against reading
the article. So Lachmann, Tisch, Westc., and Hort; and, so too, the
Protestant Revised Version. Still, there are a great many ancient authorities,
among them the Codex א (Sinait.) in favour of reading the article. But even
if the reading were certain, it would still be doubtful what feast is meant.</note> <emph>may</emph> designate the
Pasch (Matt. xxvii. 15; Mark
xv. 6); and it is to be believed
that it does in the present instance,
because ten verses before
(iv. 45) the same word is used to
designate the Pasch (compare
John ii. 13, 23). (2) From iv. 35
we learn that Jesus was on His
way, through Samaria, to
Galilee, in December; that is,
about the <emph>close</emph> of the first year
of His public life. Hence it
cannot be to any of the three
great feasts of that <emph>first</emph> year
that our text refers. Naturally,
then, it is to the Pasch of the
second year, which was the first
great feast to occur in the course
of the year, and for which, if
Christ had not gone to Jerusalem,
St. John would probably
have explained His absence, as
He does (vii. 1) in reference to
the Pasch mentioned vi. 4.
(3) Were it any other feast than
that of the Pasch, which was
by excellence <emph>the</emph> feast of the
Jews, St. John, according to
his custom (vii. 2; x. 22), would
have named it. (4) This is the
opinion of St. Irenæus, who
was a disciple of Polycarp, himself
a disciple of our Evangelist.
</p>

<p>
In favour of the feast of
Lots&mdash;(1) The absence of the
article in the more probable
reading points to one of the
minor feasts of the Jews. (2)
From John iv. 35, and vi. 4,
it would seem to be clear that
this feast fell between December
and the Pasch; but only
the feast of Lots occurred at
that time. (3) If this be the
second Pasch of our Lord's
public life, and that in vi. 4
the third, then the events of a
whole year are passed over by
our Evangelist, who proceeds,
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
in vi. 1: <q>After these things
Jesus went,</q> &amp;c., affording no
hint that he has passed over the
events of a year. (4). Were
this the Pasch, St. John would
have named it, as he does on
the other three occasions (ii.
13; vi. 4; xi. 55). But as it
was only a minor feast of the
Jews, and probably unheard-of
by the Christians of Asia Minor,
the Evangelist thinks it unnecessary
to name it, and
contents himself with referring
to it as <hi rend='bold'>a feast of the Jews</hi>.
</p>

<p>
It is perhaps impossible, as
we have said already, to decide
with certainty which feast is
meant, but we shall follow the
more common opinion and hold
that there is question of the
Pasch. Thus, we hold that
St. John mentions four Paschs
as having occurred during our
Lord's public life: the first in
ii. 13; the second here; the
third in vi. 4; and the fourth
and last in xii. 1 and xiii. 1,
when our Lord was put to
death. He passes over the
events that occurred between
the second and third Pasch,
because they were already
narrated by the Synoptic Evangelists.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. Est autem Ierosolymis
probatica piscina, quae cognominatur
hebraice Bethsaida,
quinque porticus habens.</cell>
<cell>2. Now there is at Jerusalem
a pond, <hi rend='italic'>called</hi> Probatica, which
in Hebrew is named Bethsaida,
having five porches.</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. The best supported Greek
reading would be rendered,
<q>Now there is in Jerusalem
<hi rend='italic'>by the sheep-gate</hi> (πύλη being
understood) a pond which is
called in Hebrew <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Bethesda</foreign>,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Bethesda, in Syro-Chaldaic,
which was the language of
Palestine at this time, means
the house (place) of mercy;
and the name was given in the
present instance on account of
the merciful cures wrought
there. For the building of
this sheep-gate by the priests,
see 2 Esd. iii. 1. The site of
either gate or pond cannot be
determined with certainty; but
the pond seems to have been
close to the Temple, near the
gate through which the sheep
to be sacrificed entered within
the outer enclosure of the
temple. The <hi rend='bold'>porches</hi>, which
served to shelter the sick from
sun and rain, were open on
the sides, but covered with a
roof supported on pillars.
</p>

<p>
The Vulgate reading, <hi rend='bold'>a
sheep-pond</hi>, has been variously
explained. Some say
the pond might be so called
because the sheep were washed
there before they were sacrificed;
others, because their
entrails were brought there to
be washed. <hi rend='bold'>Bethsaida</hi>, read
by the Vulgate, means the
house (place) for fishing.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. In his iacebat multitudo
magna languentium, caecorum,
claudorum, aridorum, expectantium
aquae motum.</cell>
<cell>3. In these lay a great
multitude of sick, of blind, of
lame, of withered, waiting for
the moving of the water.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4. Angelus autem Domini
descendebat secundum tempus
in piscinam: et movebatur
aqua. Et qui prior descendisset
in piscinam post
motionem aquae, sanus fiebat
a quacumque detinebatur infirmitate.</cell>
<cell>4. And an Angel of the
Lord descended at certain
times into the pond; and the
water was moved. And he
that went down first into the
pond after the motion of the
water, was made whole of whatsoever
infirmity he lay under.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3, 4. The genuineness of
the passage, beginning with
<hi rend='bold'>waiting for the moving of
the water</hi>, and comprising
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
the whole of verse 4, is disputed.
The Council of Trent,
indeed, defined <q>libros singulos
cum omnibus suis partibus
... prout in vulgata Latina
Editione habentur ... pro
sacris et canonicis esse suscipiendos:</q>
but it is not thereby
defined that every tittle (<hi rend='italic'>particula</hi>)
or every verse, is canonical
Scripture. It would seem,
therefore, that Catholics are
free to reject this passage, and
it is a question for criticism
to decide whether we are to
receive or reject it.
</p>

<p>
After an examination of the
evidence for and against, we
believe that the passage is
more probably genuine. It
stands in codex A (Alexandrinus),
and in at least ten other
uncial and very many <emph>cursive</emph>
MSS. It is read in the <q>Vetus
Itala</q> and in the Vulgate; in
the <emph>plain</emph> and <emph>figured</emph> Syriac
versions, and in the Persian,
Coptic, and Arabian versions.
It is read by Cyril of Alexandria,
Chrys., Theophy., Euthy.,
Tertull., Ambr., and August.
Finally, the context, especially
the reply of the sick man
(verse 7), supposes it. Why
it came to be wanting in so
many MSS. it is difficult to
explain.<note place='foot'>The passage is regarded as spurious by Tisch., Tregell., Westc., and Hort,
and by the Rev. Vers.</note>
</p>

<p>
That the wonderful efficacy
here attributed to the water of
this pond was miraculous, and
not merely, as the Rationalists
would have us believe, the
effect of salubrious natural
properties in the water, seems
clear. For&mdash;(1) there is the
intervention of an angel which
disturbed (ἐτάρασσε) the water;
(2) only the first person entering
the pond was cured; (3) he
was cured not gradually, but
at once, and completely:
<q>he was immediately made
whole;</q> (4) he was cured no
matter what his disease. When
the Rationalists find for us
an intermittent spring whose
waters possess the properties
here attributed to Bethesda,
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
we shall be prepared to listen
to them.
</p>

<p>
The waters of Bethesda, in
their wonderful efficacy to cure
every disease, were a striking
though imperfect type of the
waters of Penance, which heal
every spiritual malady of everyone,
be he first or last who
bathes in them.
</p>

<anchor id='V_5'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. Erat autem quidam homo
ibi triginta et octo annos
habens in infirmitate sua.</cell>
<cell>5. And there was a certain
man there, that had been eight
and thirty years under his
infirmity.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Hunc cum vidisset Iesus
iacentem, et cognovisset quia
iam multum tempus haberet,
dicit ei: Vis sanus fieri?</cell>
<cell>6. Him when Jesus had
seen lying, and knew that he
had been now a long time, he
saith to him: Wilt thou be
made whole?</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Respondit ei languidus:
Domini, hominem non habeo,
ut, cum turbata fuerit aqua,
mittat me in piscinam: dum
venio enim ego, alius ante me
descendit.</cell>
<cell>7. The infirm man answered
him: Sir, I have no man,
when the water is troubled, to
put me into the pond. For
whilst I am coming, another
goeth down before me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Dicit ei Iesus: Surge, tolle
grabatum tuum, et ambula.</cell>
<cell>8. Jesus saith to him: Arise,
take up thy bed, and walk.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Et statim sanus factus
est homo ille: et sustulit grabatum
suum, et ambulabat.
Erat autem sabbatum in die
illo.</cell>
<cell>9. And immediately the man
was made whole: and he
took up his bed and walked.
And it was the sabbath that
day.</cell></row></table>

<p>
5-9. Christ speaks with and
heals a man who had been
thirty-eight years ill (of paralysis
or some similar disease, as
would appear from verses 7-8);
and, to show how complete the
cure was, perhaps also to give
an occasion for the discourse
which follows, He orders the
man who has been cured to
take up his bed and walk. It
would be a rather severe trial
of recovered strength to have
to carry some of the beds of
modern times; but that on
which the poor paralytic had
been resting was not cumbrous.
It was probably only a carpet
or mattress, or at most there
was but a very light framework.
In Acts v. 15, we find
the term used in our text
distinguished from κλίνη,
which was rather the bed of
the rich, more expensive and
cumbrous.
</p>

<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>10. Dicebant ergo Iudaei
illi qui sanatus fuerat: Sabbatum
est, non licet tibi tollere
grabatum tuum.</cell>
<cell>10. The Jews therefore said
to him that was healed: It is
the sabbath, it is not lawful
for thee to take up thy bed.</cell></row></table>

<p>
10. <hi rend='bold'>It is not lawful.</hi> See
Exod. xx. 8; Jer. xvii. 21, 22.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. Respondit eis: Qui me
sanum fecit, ille mihi dixit:
Tolle grabatum tuum, et
ambula.</cell>
<cell>11. He answered them: He
that made me whole, he said
to me: Take up my bed, and
walk.</cell></row></table>

<p>
11. The man appeals to the
authority of Him who had
cured him, who surely must be
from God, and able to dispense
in the Sabbath law.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Interrogaverunt ergo
eum: Quis est ille homo qui
dixit tibi, Tolle grabatum
tuum, et ambula?</cell>
<cell>12. They asked him, therefore:
Who is that man who
said to thee: Take up thy bed
and walk?</cell></row>
<row><cell>13. Is autem qui sanus
fuerat effectus, nesciebat quis
esset. Iesus enim declinavit
a turba constituta in loco.</cell>
<cell>13. But he who was healed,
knew not who it was. For
Jesus went aside from the
multitude standing in the place.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. Christ had gone aside to
escape the envy of the evil-minded
as well as the admiration
of the well-disposed. See
<ref target='VI_15'>vi. 15</ref>. A more correct rendering
of the Greek would be: <hi rend='bold'>For
Jesus had gone aside, there
being a crowd in the place.</hi>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Postea invenit eum Iesus
in templo, et dixit illi: Ecce
sanus factus es: iam noli
peccare, ne deterius tibi aliquid
contingat.</cell>
<cell>14. Afterwards Jesus findeth
him in the temple, and saith
to him: Behold thou art made
whole: sin no more, lest some
worse thing happen to thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15. Abiit ille homo, et nuntiavit
Iudaeis quia Iesus esset,
quia fecit eum sanum.</cell>
<cell>15. And the man went his
way, and told the Jews that it
was Jesus who had made him
whole.</cell></row></table>

<p>
14. Christ's words, <hi rend='bold'>Sin no
more</hi>, insinuate that the man's
previous illness had been the
result of sin; and he is warned
that if he provoke God further,
something worse may happen
to him; worse, perhaps, even
on this side, and infinitely worse
beyond, the grave. <q>Some
say, indeed,</q> says St. Chrys.,
<q>because we have corrupted
ourselves for a short time, shall
we be tormented eternally?
But see how long this man was
tormented for his sins. Sin is
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
not to be measured by length
of time, but by the nature of
sin itself.</q>
</p>

<anchor id='V_16'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Propterea persequebantur
Iudaei Iesum, quia haec
faciebat in sabbato.</cell>
<cell>16. Therefore did the Jews
persecute Jesus, because he did
these things on the sabbath.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. Therefore the Jews,
especially the Scribes and
Pharisees, persecuted, or
rather, perhaps, accused<note place='foot'><q>δίωκειν haud raro est verbum forense, atque significat accusare.</q>&mdash;Kuin.</note>
Jesus for healing a man on
the Sabbath (comp. vii. 23;
Luke vi. 7), and for authorizing
him who was healed to
violate the Sabbath.
</p>

<anchor id='V_17'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Iesus autem respondit
eis: Pater meus usque modo
operatur, et ego operor.</cell>
<cell>17. But Jesus answered
them: My Father worketh
until now; and I work.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17. Christ's reply is, that as
<emph>His</emph> (not <emph>our</emph>, for He was the
natural Son of God, we are
only adopted sons) Father
worketh continually, and therefore
even on the Sabbath, conserving
and governing all
things; so, too, He Himself,
He being consubstantial with
the Father. Thus He tells
them that equally with the
Father He is exempt from the
law of the Sabbath.
</p>

<anchor id='V_18'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Propterea ergo magis
quaerebant eum Iudaei interficere,
quia non solum solvebat
sabbatum, sed et patrem suum
dicebat Deum, aequalem se
faciens Deo. Respondit itaque
Iesus, et dixit eis:</cell>
<cell>18. Hereupon therefore the
Jews sought the more to kill
him, because he did not only
break the sabbath, but also
said God was his Father,
making himself equal to God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. They understand Him,
so far at least as to see that
He makes Himself equal to
God; and as they now consider
Him to be not merely a Sabbath-breaker,
but also a blasphemer,
they become more
exasperated, and seek to kill
Him. See Deut. xiii. 5.
</p>

<anchor id='V_19'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Amen, amen dico vobis:
non potest Filius a se facere
quidquam, nisi quod viderit
Patrem facientem: quaecumque
enim ille fecerit, haec et
Filius similter facit.</cell>
<cell>19. Then Jesus answered
and said to them: Amen, amen,
I say unto you: the Son cannot
do anything of himself, but
what he seeth the Father
doing: for what things soever
he doth, these the Son also
doth in like manner.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. The remainder of the
chapter is taken up with
Christ's discourse, in which
He asserts His Divinity, and
proves it by various arguments.
(1) By His own testimony
(19-30), which the Jews might
be excused for rejecting, were
it alone and unsupported (31);
(2) by the testimony of the
Baptist (32-35); (3) by the
testimony of His miracles (36);
(4) by the testimony of His
Father which is contained in
the Sacred Scriptures (37-39).
</p>

<p>
The Jews had understood
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
Him to make Himself equal to
God, and He goes on not to
withdraw, but to reiterate and
expand what He had said.
He declares His operation as
God to be identical with that of
the Father; in a word, His
works to be the works of God.
He had received, in His eternal
generation, His Divine nature
and operation identical with the
Father's, and as God He does
nothing except what the Father
does, and the Father does
nothing except what He
does. This inability to work of
Himself, that is to say, alone,
without the Father (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a seipso</foreign>),
proceeds not from any defect of
power, but from His inseparable
union with the Father in
nature and operation. The
Son's <q>seeing,</q> and the Father's
<q>showing</q> (v. 20), are both
metaphorical expressions, and
signify that the Son derives
His divine nature and operation
from the Father.<note place='foot'><q>Unde secundum Augustinum, demonstrare Patrem Filio, nihil aliud
est quam Patrem generare Filium. Et Filium videre quae Pater facit, nihil
aliud est quam Filium esse et naturam a Patre recipere.</q>&mdash;St. Thom. on
verse 20.</note> The
Arians appealed to this verse
to prove the inferiority of the
Son to the Father, because, they
said, Christ here declares Himself
merely an imitator of the
works of the Father, just as a
pupil or apprentice imitates
his master. But Christ's
words, <q>I and the Father are
one</q> (x. 30), show that there
can be no question here of
inferiority; and, moreover,
since <emph>all</emph> things were made by
the Son (i. 3), it was impossible
for Him to copy from anything
made beforehand.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>But what he seeth</hi> (βλέπει)
<hi rend='bold'>the Father doing</hi>. <q>But what,</q>
that is, not by Himself, <emph>but</emph>
together with the Father,
<q>nisi</q> of the Vulgate being
here equal to <q>sed.</q> See Matt.
xii. 4; Gal. ii. 16.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>For what things soever He
doth, these the Son also doth
in like manner.</hi> St. Thomas on
this verse says:&mdash;<q>Excludit in
his tria circa potestatem suam:
scilicet particularitatem (<emph>quaecumque</emph>),
diversitatem (<emph>haec</emph>),
et imperfectionem (<emph>similiter</emph>).</q>
And St. Augustine on this verse
says beautifully: <q>He does
not say whatsoever the Father
doeth, the Son does <emph>other</emph> things
like them, but the very same
things. The Father made the
world, the Son made the world,
the Holy Ghost made the
world. If the Father, Son
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
and Holy Ghost, are one, it
follows that one and the same
world was made by the Father,
through the Son, in the Holy
Ghost. Thus it is the very
same thing that the Son
doth. He adds <emph>likewise</emph>, to
prevent another error arising.
For the body seems to do the
same things with the mind, but
it does not do them in a like
way, inasmuch as the body is
subject, the soul governing;
the body visible, the soul invisible.
When a slave does a
thing at the command of his
master, the same thing is
done by both; but is it in a
like way? Now in the Father
and Son there is not this difference;
they do the same things,
and in a like way. Father and
Son act with the same power;
so that the Son is equal to the
Father.</q> Since then the works
of the Son as God are the works
of the Father, if they blamed
the Son for violating the Sabbath,
they thereby blamed the
Father also. And it is of the
Son <emph>as God</emph> there is question
here; for as man, or as God-man
He could do many things
<q>of Himself,</q> such as eating,
walking on the waters, &amp;c.,
which, of course, the Father
never did; and, moreover, it
would not be true to say that
the Son as man does all that the
Father does.
</p>

<anchor id='V_20'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Pater enim diligit Filium,
et omnia demonstrat ei quae
ipse facit: et maiora his demonstrabit
ei opera, ut vos
miremini.</cell>
<cell>20. For the Father loveth
the Son, and showeth him all
things which himself doth:
and greater works than these
will he show him, that you
may wonder.</cell></row></table>

<p>
20. Here is given the reason
for the Son's identity of operation
with the Father. <hi rend='bold'>For the
Father loveth the Son</hi>, and
from all eternity communicateth
to Him the one Divine power
and operation, whereby He
Himself doth all things; and
that Divine power shall yet be
<emph>manifested</emph> by the Son in
greater works than the healing
of the paralytic, that you
may wonder.
</p>

<p>
We are not to conclude from
this verse that the love of the
Father is the cause of the communication
of the Divine nature
to the Son, as if the Son proceeded
from the Father through
love, and therefore through the
Will. The common teaching
of theologians is that the Son
proceeds not through the Divine
will, but through the Divine
intellect. See Perr. De. Trin.,
§ 401. Hence the meaning is not,
that the Father loves the Son,
and <emph>therefore</emph> communicates
His Divine nature to Him.
Toletus, however, thinks that
this form of expression is
purposely used here by Christ
to show men that the Father
shares His nature and power
with the Son, since among
men, those who love share
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
their goods with each
other.<note place='foot'><q>Est argumentum ab humano modo sumptum, respectu hominum illorum,
qui se amant, hi enim mutuo sibi omnia communicant, nihil sibi occultant, et
cum revera Pater summe diligat Filium, utitur hoc argumento ut signo, et
probatione propter nos, non autem quod causa sit cur omnia demonstret,</q>&mdash;Tolet.
For other explanations, Corl., page 118, may be consulted.</note>
</p>

<p>
As already indicated, the
future, <q>will show,</q> is used in
this verse in reference to the
<emph>manifestation</emph> in time of that
power which was given from
eternity. <hi rend='bold'>That you may
wonder.</hi> Some take <q>that</q>
(ἵνα) here as introducing a consequence;
others, and rightly,
in its usual sense as introducing
a purpose. The purpose of God
was that they might wonder
and believe.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>21. Sicut enim Pater suscitat
mortuos, et vivificat: sic et
Filius, quos vult, vivificat.</cell>
<cell>21. For as the Father raiseth
up the dead, and giveth life:
so the Son also giveth life to
whom he will.</cell></row></table>

<p>
21. The connection here
shows that the raising of the
dead is one of the <q>greater
works</q> just referred to, as is
also the judgment by Christ
mentioned in the next verse. But
who are the dead, and what is
the resurrection of which there
is question?
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Those who were <emph>corporally</emph>
dead like Lazarus, and
were raised by Christ, to the
wonder of the Jews.<note place='foot'>Mald. thinks that the principal reference in verses 21 and 25 is to the
<emph>general</emph> resurrection.</note> For&mdash;(1)
This view suits the context.
Christ had cured a paralytic;
He now promises greater miracles;
hitherto he had only
healed bodies that were sick;
now He would raise to life
bodies that were dead. (2) In
verse 28 there is certainly
question of a corporal resurrection;
therefore also here.
(3) This raising of the dead was
to excite the wonder of the
Jews; therefore there must be
question of the raising of the
body, since a spiritual resurrection
could not be known, and
hence could not be a matter of
wonder.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Those <emph>spiritually</emph> dead,
who were to be raised through
the preaching of Christ and
His Apostles from the death of
sin to the life of grace. For&mdash;(1)
It is more probable that there
is question of spiritual death
and resurrection in verse 24;
therefore also in verse 21. (2) The
words <q>And now is</q> of verse
25 point to a resurrection then
present, therefore to a <emph>spiritual</emph>.
(3) This view suits the context.
The spiritual resurrection
brought about by Christ, though
in itself invisible, produced in
the world effects <emph>more wonderful</emph>
than the curing of the paralytic,
and it is as a proof that Christ
can raise those spiritually dead,
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
that He refers in verse 28 to
the fact that He will raise those
corporally dead.
</p>

<p>
We prefer the latter view;
but whichever view we may
hold, we must bear in mind
that the sense is not that the
Father raises some, and the
Son others, from the dead. As
God, Christ's will is <emph>identical</emph>
with the Father's, and what
one does the other does.
Christ then is here said to raise
<q>whom He will</q> in order to
show us His absolute equality
with the Father.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Neque enim Pater iudicat
quemquam: sed omne iudicium
dedit Filio.</cell>
<cell>22. For neither doth the
Father judge any man: but
hath given all judgment to the
Son.</cell></row></table>

<p>
22. Another greater work
than the curing of the paralytic
is the judging of men. Some
think it is the judgment of discussion,
the trial which awaits
all (Heb. ix. 27), that is referred
to; others that (as in verses 24,
29, and iii. 19) it is the judgment
of condemnation passed
upon the reprobate, the Greek
word which is used being generally
(if not always) used by
St. John of the judgment of
condemnation. When it is said
here that <hi rend='bold'>neither doth the
Father judge any man</hi>, the
meaning is that although the
Father and the Holy Ghost
pass the same identical judgment
as the Son, yet they do
not do this <emph>visibly</emph>, so as to be
seen and heard like the God-man
Jesus Christ. This is particularly
true in regard to the
judgment of the wicked; Christ
alone, in His humanity, appears
to them; for as St. Augustine
says: <q>Si mali Deum in propria
natura viderent jam essent
beati.</q> The Father gave all
power to judge to Christ as God
in the eternal generation, to
Christ as man at the incarnation;
and it is as God and man
that Christ judges: as God
authoritatively, and as man
visibly.<note place='foot'><q>Deus eam (potestatem judiciariam) communicare noluit nec congrue
potuit puro homini, sed Christo soli, qui Deus est et homo. Ipse enim ut
Deus, summam habet auctoritatem judicandi; ut homo vero habet facultatem
judicium hoc visibiliter coram hominibus salvandis et damnandis exercendi.</q>&mdash;A
Lap.</note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Ut omnes honorificent
Filium, sicut honorificant
Patrem; qui non honorificat
Filium, non honorificat Patrem
qui misit illum.</cell>
<cell>23. That all men may honour
the Son, as they honour the
Father. He who honoureth
not the Son, honoureth not
the Father who hath sent him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
23. Here is declared the end
that God had in view in conferring
the supreme judiciary
power upon the Son, namely,
that men might honour Him
<emph>equally</emph> with the Father. He
that honoureth not the Son,
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
honoureth not the Father who
sent Him in the Incarnation
equal in all things to Himself.
In dishonouring Jesus Christ,
the Jews were dishonouring
that Divine nature and majesty
which is one with the Father's,
and they were, moreover, spurning
the testimony which the
Father had already given to
the Divinity of His Son, as well
after Christ's baptism (Matt. iii.
17), as in the miracles which
He had given Christ to perform
(verse 36).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Amen, amen dico vobis,
quia qui verbum meum audit, et
credit ei qui misit me, habet
vitam aeternam, et in iudicium
non venit, sed transiit a morte
in vitam.</cell>
<cell>24. Amen, amen, I say unto
you, that he who heareth my
word, and believeth him that
sent me, hath life everlasting;
and cometh not into judgment
but is passed from death to life.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. We believe the connection
with the preceding to be
this. In speaking of the end
God had in view in conferring
the supreme judiciary power
upon the God-man, our Lord
had noted parenthetically the
effect of not honouring the Son
(verse 23); here He adds what
the effect of honouring Him is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Amen, amen.</hi> The repeated
asseveration indicates the
solemn importance of the
declaration about to be
made, namely, that he who
accepts the teaching of Christ,
and thereby the testimony of the
Father testifying to Christ as
His Son, has eternal life. We
take <q>death</q> and <q>life</q> of
this verse of the death of sin
and the life of grace, and understand
<q>has passed</q> in reference
to the justification of the
sinner. See 1 John iii. 14, and
what we have said on <ref target='I_12'>i. 13</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Amen, amen dico vobis,
quia venit hora, et nunc est,
quando mortui audient vocem
Filii Dei: et qui audierint,
vivent.</cell>
<cell>25. Amen, amen, I say unto
you, that the hour cometh
and now is, when the dead
shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, and they that hear
shall live.</cell></row></table>

<p>
25. Having stated parenthetically
the effect of dishonouring
and honouring Himself,
Christ returns to the proof of
His divine power. There is the
same difference of opinion here
regarding the life and death
meant, as in verse 21.
</p>

<p>
The words, <hi rend='bold'>And now is</hi>,
favour the view that there is
question of a spiritual resurrection
that had already begun.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And they that hear, shall
live.</hi> These words, too, suggest
that there is question of a
spiritual resurrection, a resurrection
in which all those that
hear and believe are to share.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>26. Sicut enim Pater habet
vitam in semetipso: sic dedit
et Filio habere vitam in semetipso:</cell>
<cell>26. For as the Father hath
life in himself; so he hath
given to the Son also to have
life in himself:</cell></row></table>

<p>
26. For the Son is essential
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
Life like the Father, and being
in Himself the source of life
can therefore impart it to
others.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>27. Et potestatem dedit ei
iudicium facere, quia Filius
hominis est.</cell>
<cell>27. And he hath given him
power to do judgment, because
he is the son of man.</cell></row></table>

<p>
27. The meaning is, that as
it was ordained from all
eternity, that the Second
Person of the Blessed Trinity
should become man, so it was
ordained that He, as God-man
should judge all men without
exception in the general judgment,
and all who die after the
incarnation, in the particular
judgment.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>28. Nolite mirari hoc, quia
venit hora in qua omnes qui
in monumentis sunt, audient
vocem Filii Dei:</cell>
<cell>28. Wonder not at this, for
the hour cometh wherein all
that are in the graves shall hear
the voice of the Son of God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
28. <hi rend='bold'>This</hi> at which they are
not to wonder, is His power of
raising the dead, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the few
whom He raised corporally
during His public life, or, as
we prefer, the many whom He
raised spiritually; and His
power of judging.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>For the hour cometh
wherein all that are in the
graves shall hear the voice of
the Son of God.</hi> It is admitted
by all that the reference in these
words is to the general resurrection,
and the Jews are told not
to be surprised at the spiritual
resurrection, inasmuch as the
resurrection of all flesh shall
come to pass at the word of the
same Son of God. The words
of this verse imply that the
spiritual resurrection excites
less wonder than the corporal;
and this indeed is true, for though
the spiritual resurrection is, in
fact, the greater miracle, and in
itself more wonderful, yet it is
not sensible, and cannot excite
our wonder so much as the raising
of even one dead body to life.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>29. Et procedent qui bona
fecerunt, in resurrectionem
vitae: qui vero mala egerunt,
in resurrectionem iudicii.</cell>
<cell>29. And they that have done
good things, shall come forth
unto the resurrection of life; but
they that have done evil, unto
the resurrection of judgment.</cell></row></table>

<p>
29. This verse affords a
clear proof that we are not
justified by faith alone, but
that according to our works
we shall be rewarded or condemned.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>30. Non possum ego a
meipso facere quidquam. Sicut
audio, iudico: et iudicium
meum iustum est, quia non
quaero voluntatem meam, sed
voluntatem eius qui misit me.</cell>
<cell>30. I cannot of myself do
anything. As I hear, so I
judge: and my judgment is
just: because I seek not my
own will, but the will of him
that sent me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
30. What Christ said in verse
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
19 of every operation of His,
He now repeats and applies in
particular to this judgment.
Since He judges as God-man,
the words <q>As I hear,</q> probably
refer both to His Divine
nature, which, like His judgment
was identical with that
of the Father, and to His
human nature, in which, on
account of the plenitude of
grace within Him, He can
think or will nothing contrary
to the Father.<note place='foot'><q>Nam ipse, qua Deus, idem numero habet judicium, eandem numero
mentem et voluntatem divinam quam habet Pater; qua homo vero, totus
regitur a deitate et verbo inhabitante, ut aliud judicare et velle nequeat quam
id quod ejus deitas, quasi praeses, judicat et vult.</q>&mdash;A Lap.</note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>31. Si ego testimonium
perhibeo de meipso, testimonium
meum non est verum.</cell>
<cell>31. If I bear witness of myself,
my witness is not true.</cell></row></table>

<p>
31. From verse 19 Christ
has borne witness to Himself,
to His Divine power and
equality with the Father, and
now He says that if He were
<emph>alone</emph> in bearing such witness
of Himself, His witness would
not be such as men would be
bound to receive. Of course,
even though a man were alone
and unsupported in testifying
regarding himself, still it is
plain his witness <emph>might be true</emph>;
but it would not be trustworthy,
such as ought to be
received, because it <emph>might be
false</emph>, and would be reasonably
suspected. No doubt, Christ's
testimony of Himself though
unsupported would be more
than enough to those who
believed in His Divinity; but
He is here addressing those
who had no such belief.
Comp. viii. 14-16.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>32. Alius est qui testimonium
perhibet de me: et scio quia
verum est testimonium quod
perhibet de me.</cell>
<cell>32. There is another that
beareth witness of me: and I
know that the witness which
he witnesseth of me is true.</cell></row></table>

<p>
32. Christ's witness of Himself
is supported by that of the
<emph>Father</emph> (some think, by that of
the Baptist), to which He can
confidently appeal. But before
mentioning how the Father's
testimony is given, He turns
aside for a moment to appeal
to the Baptist's testimony.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>33. Vos misistis ad Ioannem:
et testimonium perhibuit
veritati.</cell>
<cell>33. You sent to John; and
he gave testimony to the truth.</cell></row>
<row><cell>34. Ego autem non ab
homine testimonium accipio:
sed haec dico ut vos salvi
sitis.</cell>
<cell>34. But I receive not testimony
from man: but I say
these things that you may be
saved.</cell></row></table>

<p>
34. He now tells them that
He has invoked the testimony
of the Baptist, not that
He needs any testimony of
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
men, but in the hope that they,
who had regarded the Baptist
as a prophet, might perchance
accept his testimony to Christ.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>35. Ille erat lucerna ardens,
et lucens: Vos autem voluistis
ad horam exultare in luce
eius.</cell>
<cell>35. He was a burning and
a shining light. And you
were willing for a time to
rejoice in his light.</cell></row></table>

<p>
35. The Greek is: <hi rend='italic'>He was
the lamp that burneth and
shineth</hi>. From the use of the
word <emph>was</emph> here, it is fairly concluded
that the Baptist had been
already put to death by Herod
Antipas (Mark vi. 17-28). The
Baptist was a bright <emph>lamp</emph>
λύχνος of truth, but not <emph>the
light</emph> (τὸ φῶς i. 8, 9), which was
Christ Himself.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>36. Ego autem habeo testimonium
maius Ioanne. Opera
enim quae dedit mihi Pater ut
perficiam ea, ipsa opera quae
ego facio, testimonium perhibent
de me, quia Pater misit
me:</cell>
<cell>36. But I have a greater
testimony than that of John.
For the works which the
Father hath given me to
perfect: the works themselves,
which I do, give testimony of
me, that the Father hath sent
me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
36. A third testimony is
now invoked in the miracles
which the Father gave Christ
to perform. See x. <ref target='X_37'>37</ref>, <ref target='X_37'>38</ref>,
and what was said above on
<ref target='III_2'>iii. 2</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>37. Et qui misit me Pater,
ipse testimonium perhibuit de
me: neque vocem eius unquam
audistis, neque speciem eius
vidistis:</cell>
<cell>37. And the Father himself
who hath sent me, hath given
testimony of me: neither have
you heard his voice at any
time, nor seen his shape.</cell></row>
<row><cell>38. Et verbum eius non
habetis in vobis manens: quia
quem misit ille, huic vos non
creditis.</cell>
<cell>38. And you have not his
word abiding in you: for
whom he hath sent, him you
believe not.</cell></row></table>

<p>
37, 38. Besides the indirect
testimony of the Father through
Christ's miracles, another testimony
of His is now appealed
to. Some understand this of
the testimony of the Father on
the occasion of Christ's baptism,
(Matt. iii. 17). So Chrys.,
A Lap., M'Ev. But if there
were reference to that past and
definite occasion, the Greek
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
aorist, not the perfect, would be
used. Others, as Mald., connect
this verse closely with the preceding,
and hold the reference
is still to the Father's testimony
given through Christ's
miracles. But the form of
words: <q>And the Father Himself,
who hath sent Me, hath
given testimony of Me,</q> seems
to add another distinct testimony
to those already mentioned.
Others, therefore,
hold that the reference is to
the Father's testimony conveyed
through the oracles of
the prophets. So St. Cyril,
Theoph., Euthy., Kuin., Corl.;
and this opinion seems to be
the correct one.
</p>

<p>
About the meaning and connection
of the words which follow
in this verse and the next,
there is a great variety of view.
</p>

<p>
(1) Some thus: But you
have never listened to His voice
speaking to you through the
Sacred Scriptures, nor recognised
Him as speaking in
them, nor do you believe in
His inspired word; and the
reason of this is, because you
do not believe in Me whom He
has sent. (Patriz.)
</p>

<p>
(2) Others thus: But though
the Father has testified of Me,
<q>neither have you heard His
voice ... abiding in you;</q>
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, you have been excluded
from familiarity with Him, and
from belief in His testimony,
because you refuse to believe
in Me. (Hengstenberg.)
</p>

<p>
(3) Others take the words to
refer to the covenant entered
into by God with the Jews
(Deut. xviii. 15-19), that He
should terrify them no more
by His awful presence, as
when He gave the law on
Sinai (Exod. xx. 19-21), but
should speak to them through
a prophet. Hence Christ's
words signify: The Father
has borne testimony of Me,
nor has He broken His word
to you, that you should hear
and see no more the terrifying
sounds and sights of Sinai;
and yet you refuse to keep
your part of the compact
(<q>you have not His word
abiding in you</q>), inasmuch as
you refuse to believe in Me,
the Prophet whom He promised.
(Tolet., Beel.)
</p>

<p>
(4) Others again thus: The
Father has borne unquestionable
testimony of Me, though
not, I admit, in such a manner
as that He could be seen, or
His voice heard by you. But
that testimony you accept not
(you have not His word abiding
in you), as is plain from the fact
that you refuse to believe in Me.
See the note to A Lap., in
Migne's Ed., which agrees with
Kuinoel.
</p>

<p>
Whatever view be adopted,
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
we understand the testimony
referred to in verse 37, to be
that which is explicitly mentioned
in verse 39; viz., the
testimony of God given
through the Scriptures in
the writings of Moses and
the prophets.<note place='foot'>The inspiration of the prophets, though usually attributed to the Holy
Ghost, is, like every work that is not terminated in God Himself, common to
the three divine Persons, and is here referred to the Father, since Christ is
addressing the Jews, who knew nothing of the Holy Ghost, and would not value
His testimony.</note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>39. Scrutamini scripturas,
quia vos putatis in ipsis vitam
aeternam habere: et illae sunt,
quae testimonium perhibent de
me:</cell>
<cell>39. Search the scriptures,
for you think in them to have
life everlasting; and the same
are they that give testimony
of me:</cell></row></table>

<p>
39. Here our Lord distinctly
mentions the testimony to
which He had already alluded
(verse 37). <hi rend='bold'>Search the
Scriptures</hi>, or rather, <hi rend='bold'>Ye
search the Scriptures</hi>. In both
the Greek and Latin texts the
form of the verb leaves it doubtful
whether it is to be understood
as an indicative or an imperative.
But the context, in which
all the verbs are in the indicative,
and the course of the argument,
render it much more probable
that the form is to be understood
as an indicative. So,
too, all the best modern commentators,
even among the
Protestants; <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Kuin., Alf.,
Bloomf., Westc., and the Revised
Version, which renders:
<q>Ye search the Scriptures.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is unnecessary then to delay
long in refuting the argument
which used to be drawn by
Protestants from this text in
favour of the <emph>indiscriminate</emph>
reading of the Bible by all the
faithful. A few words will
suffice. (1) It is much more
probable that the words do
not contain a precept, but
merely state a fact. (2) Even
if they did contain a precept,
they are addressed very probably
only to the Jewish
<emph>teachers</emph> (see verse <ref target='V_44'>44</ref>). (3) Even
if we admitted that the words
contain a precept, and are addressed
to all the Jews, still it
would not follow that all the
faithful now are bound to read
the Bible, nor that the Church
may not sometimes, for grave
reasons restrict the liberty to
read it. For we must bear in
mind that our Lord is here
referring to the Sacred Scriptures
in connection with one
particular point, namely, the
fulfilment of prophecy in Himself.
Even if the Jews were
authorized or commanded to
read the Sacred Scriptures in
regard to a particular question,
it by no means follows that
Protestants are commanded or
even authorized to read them in
order to form by the aid of
private judgment an opinion on
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
all questions of faith and
morals.
</p>

<p>
The Catholic Church freely
admits, of course, and insists
that the reading of the Bible is
in itself good and useful; but
since the Bible contains <q>certain
things hard to be understood,
which the unlearned and unstable
wrest ... to their own
destruction</q> (2 Pet. iii. 16),
hence she knows it is possible
that, like all God's best gifts,
the Bible may in certain circumstances
be abused.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>40. Et non vultis venire ad
me ut vitam habeatis.</cell>
<cell>40. And you will not come
to me that you may have life.</cell></row></table>

<p>
40. <hi rend='bold'>And</hi> is equivalent to
<q>and yet.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>41. Claritatem ab hominibus
non accipio.</cell>
<cell>41. I receive not glory from
men.</cell></row></table>

<p>
41. Not through a desire to
gain glory from them has He
borne the preceding testimony
to Himself. This is said parenthetically,
and the next verse is
to be connected with verse 40.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>42. Sed cognovi vos, quia
dilectionem Dei non habetis in
vobis.</cell>
<cell>42. But I know you, that
you have not the love of God
in you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
42. <hi rend='bold'>But I know you, that</hi>
&amp;c. Their unbelief in Christ was
due to the fact that they did not
love God. Had they loved God,
they would have corresponded
with grace, and recognised
the Messias whom God had
sent.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>43. Ego veni in nomine
Patris mei, et non accipitis
me: si alius venerit in nomine
suo, illum accipietis.</cell>
<cell>43. I am come in the name
of my Father, and you receive
me not: if another shall come
in his own name, him you will
receive.</cell></row></table>

<p>
43. The sense is: I am
come in the name, and with the
power of My Father manifested
in My works. If another come
to you, and without giving
any evidence that He is from
God, say that he is the Messias,
you will believe him, and
believe in him. We know that
this actually happened. Many
false Christs arose before the
destruction of Jerusalem (70
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>); and obtained a following
among the people. A person
named Barchochebas was the
most successful of those impostors.
</p>

<anchor id='V_44'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>44. Quomodo vos potestis
credere, qui gloriam ab invicem
accipitis: et gloriam,
quae a solo Deo est, non
quaeritis?</cell>
<cell>44. How can you believe,
who receive glory one from
another: and the glory which
is from God alone, you do not
seek?</cell></row></table>

<p>
44. Another cause of their
unbelief is their empty vanity
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
which sought, and was satisfied
with, the praise of men.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>45. Nolite putare quia ego
accusaturus sim vos apud
Patrem: est qui accusat vos
Moyses, in quo vos speratis.</cell>
<cell>45. Think not that I will
accuse you to the Father.
There is one that accuseth
you, Moses, in whom you trust.</cell></row></table>

<p>
45. It will not be necessary
for Christ to accuse them before
God, because Moses, their own
great prophet, will accuse
them.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>46. Si enim crederetis Moysi,
crederetis forsitan et mihi: de
me enim ille scripsit.</cell>
<cell>46. For if you did believe
Moses, you would perhaps
believe me also. For he wrote
of me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
46. <hi rend='bold'>You would perhaps.</hi>
See above on <ref target='IV_10'>iv. 10</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>47. Si autem illius litteris
non creditis, quomodo verbis
meis credetis?</cell>
<cell>47. But if you do not believe
his writings: how will you
believe my words?</cell></row></table>

<p>
47. This is said because
Moses far surpassed Him in
their estimation; and with the
telling thought, that their own
Scriptures, even Moses himself,
pointed Him out as their
Messias, this weighty discourse
ends.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
1-13. <hi rend='bold'>Christ crosses with His disciples to the eastern shore of the sea
of Galilee, where He miraculously feeds a multitude with five
loaves and two fishes.</hi>
</p>

<p>
14-15. <hi rend='bold'>The multitude, moved by the miracle, wish to make Him
King, but He withdraws.</hi>
</p>

<p>
16-21. <hi rend='bold'>On the night of that same day, as the disciples are crossing to
the western side of the lake, a storm rises, and He comes to
them, walking upon the waters.</hi>
</p>

<p>
22-25. <hi rend='bold'>The following day the multitude also cross to the western
side of the lake, enter Capharnaum, and find Him there before
them.</hi>
</p>

<p>
26-59. <hi rend='bold'>Christ's discourse to the multitude, in which He promises the
Blessed Eucharist.</hi>
</p>

<p>
60. <hi rend='bold'>The place where the discourse was delivered.</hi>
</p>

<p>
61-67. <hi rend='bold'>Effect of the discourse&mdash;murmuring of many of the disciples; His
explanation, and their departure from Him.</hi>
</p>

<p>
68-70. <hi rend='bold'>St. Peter's noble confession in reply to a question of Christ.</hi>
</p>

<p>
71-72. <hi rend='bold'>Christ refers to the wickedness of one of the Apostles, and the
Evangelist states to whom He refers.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<anchor id='VI_1'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Post haec abiit Iesus trans
mare Galilaeae, quod est
Tiberiadis:</cell>
<cell>1. After these things, Jesus
went over the sea of Galilee,
which is that of Tiberias:</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. The interval to be admitted
between what is recorded in
this chapter and in the preceding
depends upon the view
we adopt as to what feast is
referred to in the first verse
of the preceding. If that
was the Feast of Pasch, almost
a year has elapsed, for we
are told here, in verse 4, that
the pasch is again at hand. If
that was the Feast of Lots,
and this the Pasch following,
then the interval to be admitted
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
is much less, only a month.
Those who, like us, admit
the longer interval say that
St. John here passes over the
events of that year, because
they were already related by
the Synoptic Evangelists.
</p>

<p>
In the last chapter we left
Jesus at Jerusalem in Judea,
the southern province of
Palestine, and now, soon after
the death of the Baptist (Matt.
xiv. 3, Mark vi. 17, Luke iii. 20)
and the return of the Apostles
from their first mission (Mark
vi. 30; Luke ix. 10), we find
Him in the northern province,
by the shores of the Sea of Galilee.
This sea or lake (the Jews
called every large body of water
a sea), which lay to the east
of the province of Galilee, was
called also the Sea of Tiberias,
because of the town built by
Herod Antipas, on its western
shore, and named after the
Roman Emperor Tiberius. It
was also called sometimes the
Lake of Gennesareth, from the
fertile plain of that name on
its N.W. shore. It is almost
heart-shaped, with the narrow
end towards the south, and its
extent at present is 12-½ miles
from north to south, by 8 miles
at its widest part east to west.
(Smith's <hi rend='italic'>B. D.</hi>, 2nd Ed.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. Et sequebatur eum multitudo
magna, quia videbant
signa quae faciebat super his
qui infirmabantur.</cell>
<cell>2. And a great multitude
followed him, because they
saw the miracles which he did
on them that were diseased.</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. Jesus, accompanied by
His disciples, having crossed
the lake, a great multitude
follows Him. Comparing the
Synoptic Evangelists (Matt.
xiv. 13, and foll.; Mark vi. 32,
and foll.; Luke ix. 10, and
foll.), we find that the desert
near Bethsaida (Julias) on the
north-eastern side of the lake
was the place to which Jesus
repaired (Luke); that the multitude
followed by land (πέζη
= on foot, Matt., Mark); that
they arrived before Him (Mark),
and that He taught them for a
considerable time.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Subiit ergo in montem
Iesus: et ibi sedebat cum
discipulis suis.</cell>
<cell>3. Jesus went therefore up
into a mountain, and there he
sat with his disciples.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus therefore went up
into a mountain</hi> (Gr., <emph>the</emph>
mountain); <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the well-known
mountain range on that side of
the lake. See too in verse <ref target='VI_15'>15</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Erat autem proximum
pascha, dies festus Iudaeorum.</cell>
<cell>4. Now the Pasch, the
festival day of the Jews, was
near at hand.</cell></row></table>

<p>
4. In the view we follow this
was the third Pasch of our
Lord's public life.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. Cum sublevasset ergo
oculos Iesus, et vidisset quia
multitudo maxima venit ad
eum, dixit ad Philippum: Unde
ememus panes, ut manducent
hi?</cell>
<cell>5. When Jesus therefore
had lifted up his eyes, and
seen that a very great multitude
cometh to him, he said
to Philip: Whence shall we
buy bread that these may eat?</cell></row></table>

<p>
5. In the Synoptic Evangelists
the disciples are
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
represented as asking our Lord
to dismiss the multitude, that
they may go and procure food.
We may reconcile with St.
John's account thus. They
make a suggestion, as in the
Synoptic Evangelists. He then
turns to Philip, as in St. John.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Hoc autem dicebat tentans
eum: ipse enim sciebat
quid esset facturus.</cell>
<cell>6. And this he said to try
him: for he himself knew
what he would do.</cell></row></table>

<p>
6. <hi rend='bold'>To try him.</hi> <q>One kind
of temptation leads to sin, with
which God never tempts anyone;
and there is another kind
by which faith is tried. In this
sense it is said that Christ
proved His disciples. This is
not meant to imply that He did
not know what Philip would
say, but is an accommodation
to man's way of speaking. For
as the expression: <hi rend='italic'>Who
searcheth the hearts of men</hi>,
does not mean the searching
of ignorance, but of absolute
knowledge; so here, when it
is said that our Lord proved
Philip, we must understand that
He knew him perfectly, but
that He tried him in order to
confirm his faith. The Evangelist
himself guards against
the mistake which this imperfect
mode of speaking might
occasion, by adding <hi rend='italic'>For He
Himself knew what He would
do</hi></q> (St. Aug.).
</p>

<anchor id='VI_7'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Respondit ei Philippus:
Ducentorum denariorum panes
non sufficiunt eis, ut unusquisque
modicum quid accipiat.</cell>
<cell>7. Philip answered him:
Two hundred pennyworth of
bread is not sufficient for
them, that every one may take
a little.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. The denarius was a Roman
silver coin, whose value differed
at different times. From the
year 217 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> till the reign of
Augustus (30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> to 14 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) it
was worth 8-½<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi>; afterwards,
and, therefore, in the time of
Christ, it was worth about 7-½<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi>
See Smith's <hi rend='italic'>Lat. Dict. Calendarium</hi>,
Tables viii. and ix.
Two hundred denarii, then
would be equal to about £6 5<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi>,
and yet what bread this would
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
purchase would not suffice to
give even a little to each, so
great was the multitude.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>8. Dicit ei unus ex discipulis
eius, Andreas frater Simonis
Petri.</cell>
<cell>8. One of his disciples,
Andrew, the brother of Simon
Peter, saith to him:</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Est puer unus hic, qui
habet quinque panes hordeaceos,
et duos pisces: sed
haec quid sunt inter tantos?</cell>
<cell>9. There is a boy here that
hath five barley loaves and
two fishes: but what are
these among so many?</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Dixit ergo Iesus: Facite
homines discumbere. Erat
autem foenum multum in loco.
Discubuerunt ergo viri, numero
quasi quinque millia.</cell>
<cell>10. Then Jesus said: Make
the men sit down. Now there
was much grass in the place.
The men therefore sat down
in number about five thousand.</cell></row></table>

<p>
10. Christ tells the disciples
to bid the multitude be seated
<q>on the green grass</q> (Mark
vi. 39); and about 5,000 men
(<q>not reckoning women and
children,</q> Matt. xiv. 21) sat
down in companies <q>by hundreds
and by fifties</q> (Mark
vi. 40).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. Accepit ergo Iesus panes:
et cum gratias egisset, distribuit
discumbentibus: similiter
et ex piscibus quantum
volebant.</cell>
<cell>11. And Jesus took the
loaves: and when he had
given thanks, he distributed
to them that were set down.
In like manner also of the
fishes as much as they would.</cell></row></table>

<p>
11. Having returned thanks
for all the benefits of God, and
particularly for that which He
was now about to bestow, Christ
took and blessed the loaves and
fishes, and through His disciples
distributed them to the multitude
(Matt., Mark, Luke). It
is not said at what precise time
the loaves were multiplied or
enlarged, whether in the hands
of Christ, or of the disciples. It
may be, as Mald. supposes, that
the increase began in our Lord's
hands, and continued as far as
necessary during the distribution
by the disciples. That it
at least began in our Lord's
hands, we think extremely probable,
for thus He was more
clearly shown to be the author
of the miracle.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Ut autem impleti sunt,
dixit discipulis suis: Colligite
quae superaverunt fragmenta,
ne pereant.</cell>
<cell>12. And when they were
filled, he said to his disciples:
Gather up the fragments that
remain, lest they be lost.</cell></row></table>

<p>
12. The disciples are told to
gather up the fragments&mdash;(1) to
teach us not to neglect the gifts
of God; (2) that the fragments
might serve as a proof and a
memorial of the miracle which
had been wrought.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>13. Collegerunt ergo, et
impleverunt duodecim cophinos
fragmentorum ex quinque
panibus hordeaceis, quae
superfuerunt his qui manducaverant.</cell>
<cell>13. They gathered up therefore,
and filled twelve baskets
with the fragments of the five
barley loaves, which remained
over and above to them that
had eaten.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. <q>Observe how the four
Evangelists use the word κοφίνους,
<hi rend='italic'>baskets</hi>, in narrating this
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
miracle, thus distinguishing it
from a like one recorded elsewhere
by Matthew and Mark, in
which there were seven loaves,
and 4,000 men, and seven <emph>panniers</emph>
(σπυρίδας) of fragments.
It is difficult perhaps to
point out distinctly how σπυρίς
differed from κόφινος, but certain
it is that they did differ, else
they would never have been so
nicely discriminated by the
sacred writers in every instance</q>
(M'Carthy: Gosp. of the Sundays,
fourth Sunday of Lent).<note place='foot'>From Juvenal we learn that in Rome the cophinus was carried about
with them by the Jews: <q>Judaeis Quorum cophinus foenumque supellex.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi>
iii. 14.</note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Illi ergo homines cum
vidissent quod Iesus fecerat
signum, dicebant: Quia hic
est vere propheta, qui venturus
est in mundum.</cell>
<cell>14. Now these men, when
they had seen what a miracle
Jesus had done, said: This is
of a truth the prophet that is
to come into the world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
14. <hi rend='bold'>The prophet</hi>, the Messiah,
for whom their fathers and they
had yearned so long (Luke vii.
19).
</p>

<anchor id='VI_15'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>15. Iesus ergo cum cognovisset,
quia venturi essent ut
raperent eum, et facerent eum
regem, fugit iterum in montem
ipse solus.</cell>
<cell>15. Jesus therefore when he
knew that they would come to
take him by force and make
him king, fled again into the
mountain himself alone.</cell></row></table>

<p>
15. Jesus, knowing their
thoughts and intentions, withdrew
to <emph>the</emph> mountain, where
He had already been earlier in
the day (verse 3). And He withdrew
all alone, a circumstance
which makes it extremely probable
that He rendered Himself
invisible, else some of the crowd
would have followed.
</p>

<p>
It may seem strange at first
sight, how differently Christ
treats the Jews, on their recognising
Him as the Messias,
from the way He treated the
Samaritans in similar circumstances
(iv. 42, 43). And yet
His action in the two cases is
intelligible enough. The Jews
looked for a Messias who
would improve their external
condition, free them from subjection
to any foreign power,
and set them up as a powerful
nation. But the Samaritans
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
could have, and had, no such
hope from the advent of a
Jewish Messias. With the
Jews, as we see in the present
instance, the intention was to
declare the Messias their King,
and thus to throw off their
allegiance to Rome. The consequence,
of course, would
have been great political excitement
and rebellion, ending,
doubtless, in the triumph of
the Roman arms. But no
matter what the success of
such a rebellion, it would have
prejudiced the Roman world
against the teachings of Christ,
and rendered more difficult the
recognition of the spiritual
character of Christ's kingdom.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Ut autem sero factum
est descenderunt discipuli eius
ad mare.</cell>
<cell>16. And when evening was
come, his disciples went down
to the sea.</cell></row>
<row><cell>17. Et cum ascendissent
navim, venerunt trans mare in
Capharnaum: et tenebrae iam
factae erant: et non venerat
ad eos Iesus.</cell>
<cell>17. And when they had
gone up into a ship, they went
over the sea to Capharnaum:
and it was now dark, and Jesus
was not come unto them.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17. <hi rend='bold'>They went over the
sea.</hi> Rather, <hi rend='bold'>they were
going</hi>. From St. Matthew
we learn that Christ had told
the disciples immediately after
the miracle, to go before Him
across the lake, whilst He
dismissed the crowd. St.
Mark adds that they were told
to cross to Bethsaida; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, to
the town of this name, which
was near Capharnaum. See
above, <ref target='I_44'>i. 44</ref>. The direction of
the wind or some other motive
may have induced them to go
towards Capharnaum, as St.
John here tells us they did.
</p>

<anchor id='VI_18'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Mare autem, vento
magno flante, exurgebat.</cell>
<cell>18. And the sea arose by
reason of a great wind that
blew.</cell></row>
<row><cell>19. Cum remigassent ergo
quasi stadia viginti quinque
aut triginta, vident Iesum
ambulantem supra mare, et
proximum navi fieri, et timuerunt.</cell>
<cell>19. When they had rowed
therefore about five and
twenty or thirty furlongs, they
see Jesus walking upon the
sea, and drawing nigh to the
ship, and they were afraid.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. The stadium, a Greek
measure, was nearly equal to
an English furlong, so that
the distance here indicated
was, at the least, almost three
miles. The exact length of
the stadium was 625 feet, that
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
of the English furlong is 660
feet.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Ille autem dicit eis:
Ego sum, nolite timere.</cell>
<cell>20. But he saith to them:
It is I: be not afraid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21. Voluerunt ergo accipere
eum in navim: et statim
navis fuit ad terram, in quam
ibant.</cell>
<cell>21. They were willing therefore
to take him into the ship:
and presently the ship was at
the land, to which they were
going.</cell></row></table>

<p>
21. <hi rend='bold'>They were willing
therefore to take him into
the ship.</hi> ἤθελον here is
equivalent to an adverb (Kuin.),
and the sense is: <q>They
gladly took Him into the ship</q>
(boat), as St. Mark indeed
tells us they did (Mark vi. 51).
Or, if, with Winer, <hi rend='italic'>Gr. Gram.</hi>,
p. 586, it be admitted that θέλω
never has an adverbial force,
except in the participle, then we
would explain that though at
first afraid (verse 19), they were
afterwards willing to take Him
into the ship, and took Him in.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Altera die, turba quae
stabat trans mare, vidit quia
navicula alia non erat ibi nisi
una, et quia non introisset
cum discipulis suis Iesus in
navim, sed soli discipuli eius
abiissent:</cell>
<cell>22. The next day, the multitude
that stood on the other
side of the sea, saw that there
was no other ship there but
one, and that Jesus had not
entered into the ship with his
disciples, but that his disciples
were gone away alone.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23. Aliae vero supervenerunt
naves a Tiberiade, iuxta locum
ubi manducaverant panem,
gratias agente Domino.</cell>
<cell>23. But other ships came in
from Tiberias, nigh unto the
place where they had eaten the
bread, the Lord giving thanks.</cell></row>
<row><cell>24. Cum ergo vidisset turba
quia Iesus non esset ibi, neque
discipuli eius, ascenderunt in
naviculas, et venerunt Capharnaum
quaerentes Iesum.</cell>
<cell>24. When therefore the
multitude saw that Jesus was
not there, nor his disciples,
they took shipping, and came
to Capharnaum seeking for
Jesus.</cell></row></table>

<p>
22-24. On the following
day, the crowd on the eastern
shore seek for Jesus (verse 24),
thinking Him to be still on
that side of the lake, inasmuch
as He had not left by the only
boat that was there on the
preceding evening (verse 22).
Not finding Him, they take
boats which had just arrived
on the eastern shore, and cross
to the western shore to seek
Jesus in Capharnaum, where
He usually abode at this time.
</p>

<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Et cum invenissent eum
trans mare, dixerunt ei: Rabbi,
quando huc venisti?</cell>
<cell>25. And when they had
found him on the other side of
the sea, they said to him: Rabbi,
when camest thou hither?</cell></row></table>

<p>
25. When they found Jesus,
they asked Him when He had
come to Capharnaum, being
equally anxious, no doubt, to
know <emph>how</emph> He had come.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>26. Respondit eis Iesus, et
dixit: Amen, amen dico vobis:
quaeritis me, non quia vidistis
signa, sed quia manducastis
ex panibus, et saturati estis.</cell>
<cell>26. Jesus answered them
and said: Amen, amen, I say
to you, you seek me, not
because you have seen miracles,
but because you did eat of the
loaves, and were filled.</cell></row></table>

<p>
26. Without answering their
question, our Lord takes occasion
from the miracle of the
preceding day to raise their
thoughts to a higher and more
precious bread than that which
He had miraculously given
them. But first He tells them
that they followed Him, not
because they had realized the
spiritual significance of His
miracles, and believed Him
to be God, but merely, He
implies, because they hoped
for a gross material satisfaction,
such as they had experienced
the preceding day.
The Greek word, rendered:
<emph>and were filled</emph>, means literally;
were satisfied with food, as
animals with fodder.
</p>

<p>
Having thus made known
to them, that He knew their
motive in following Him, He
goes on to tell them to labour
not, that is to say, not so
much, for the food that
perisheth as for that which
endureth unto eternal life.
This food enduring unto
eternal life (verse 27) we understand
to be the Blessed
Eucharist.
</p>

<p>
But before giving our
reasons for holding that reference
to the Blessed Eucharist
begins here, and not merely
at verses 48, 51, or 52, it is
desirable to indicate the Protestant
interpretations of this
discourse of our Lord, and
prove that they are untenable.
</p>

<p>
Most Protestants deny that
there is any reference to the
Blessed Eucharist in this
chapter; they hold that it
refers merely to the reception
of Christ through faith; and
through faith especially in the
atoning efficacy of His passion
and death. It is of this faith
in His passion that they interpret
the words: <q>Except you
eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink His blood,
you shall not have life in you,</q>
(verse 54). Indeed they are
logically constrained either to
deny that there is reference
here to the sacrament of the
Eucharist, or else to abandon
their teaching regarding the
nature and efficacy of the
sacraments. On the one hand,
if they admit reference to the
Eucharist, they see the difficulty
of denying the real and substantial
presence of Christ in
the sacrament; on the other
hand, holding, as they do,
that the few sacraments which
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
they retain,<note place='foot'>Calvin retained Baptism, Eucharist, and Holy Orders; Zwingli, Baptism,
Eucharist, and Matrimony; Luther, in the Confession of Augsburg, Baptism,
Eucharist, and Penance; and the Anglican Church, in the 25th of the Thirty-nine
Articles, Baptism and the Eucharist.</note> are not <emph>causes</emph> of
grace, as the Catholic Church
teaches, but merely signs or
pledges of grace, and external
notes of the Church, they find
themselves in direct conflict
with our Lord, if His words
are to be understood of the
sacrament of the Eucharist.
For again and again throughout
this discourse He attributes
salvation and grace to the
eating of His flesh and the
drinking of His blood, in such
a way as to leave no room for
doubt that whatever it is He
speaks of, whether faith or the
sacrament of the Eucharist, it
is the cause of grace. See,
<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, 27, 52, 55, 57, 59.
</p>

<p>
But besides those who deny
that there is any reference to
the Blessed Eucharist in this
chapter, there is a considerable
number of Protestants who
take up even a more indefensible
position. These admit
the reference, but contend that
nothing more can be concluded
from this or any other part of
Scripture than that Christ is
<emph>spiritually</emph> present in the Sacrament.
They will not admit
that Christ is really and substantially
present, much less
that the sacrament causes
grace. Against the first class
we shall show that Christ
refers, in this discourse, to the
Blessed Eucharist; and against
the second, that His words
prove that He is really and
substantially received in the
sacrament.
</p>

<p>
I. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Christ refers in this Discourse
to the Blessed
Eucharist.</hi><note place='foot'>Though it is not <emph>defined</emph> that there is reference to the Blessed Eucharist
in any part of the 6th chapter of St. John, still, since the Council of Trent
understood the passage (52-59) in this sense (Sess. xiii., cap. 2), as did nearly all
the fathers who commented on the chapter, it would be rash for a Catholic to
deny that the Blessed Eucharist is promised in the passage 52-59.</note>
</p>

<p>
We may premise that no
more appropriate occasion
could have been chosen by
Christ for promising this
heavenly bread than the day
following that on which He had
multiplied the bread in the
desert; and we know that it
was Christ's practice to
explain His doctrines as they
were suggested by circumstances.
Thus, after curing
the <emph>centurion's</emph> servant, He foretells
the vocation of the <emph>Gentiles</emph>
(Matt. viii. 6-13); after
expelling the unclean spirit, He
describes the power of Satan
(Matt. xii. 22-45); after asking
for water, He speaks of the
water of life to the Samaritan
woman (John iv. 10, and foll.);
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
after healing the paralytic, He
predicts the general resurrection
(John v. 28); and after
curing the man born blind,
He denounces the blindness of
the Pharisees (John ix. 41). It
was quite in accordance with
Christ's practice, then, to predict
the Blessed Eucharist on
the present occasion: and that
He did so is proved by the
following arguments:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(1) If St. John did not mean
to record here a reference to
the Blessed Eucharist, then he
does not mention that sacrament
at all, for he does not
allude, unless perhaps very
obscurely (xiii. 1) to its institution.
But it is very improbable
that our Evangelist omits all
mention of this sacrament in
his Gospel. For if, as we shall
prove, this sacrament contains
the body and blood of Christ,
there was a reason why
St. John should mention it in
order to confirm the faithful
against the Docetae who
denied the reality of Christ's
human nature. Nor does it at
all weaken this argument to
say that the Docetae who
denied the reality of the body
in which Christ had walked
and talked, would not be likely
to be convinced by a reference
to His body present in the
Eucharist. For St. John wrote,
not to convert heretics, but to
confirm against heresy Christians
who believed in the real
presence.
</p>

<p>
(2) Christ's words (27, 52)
can refer only to the Eucharist.
For He speaks of a food which
was still to be given <emph>in the
future</emph>, whereas His <emph>doctrines</emph>,
and His <emph>Person</emph> as the object of
faith, had been given already.
</p>

<p>
(3) His words: <q>Amen,
amen, I say unto you: Except
you eat the flesh of the Son
of Man, and drink His blood,
you shall not have life in you</q>
(verse 54), could be understood
only in a literal sense, and so
understood, they must refer to
the Blessed Eucharist. For, if
Christ had spoken in a figurative
sense, it should be in that
figurative sense which was
known and recognised among
the Jews. Now, the recognised
figurative sense of eating a
man's flesh was to do him some
serious injury, especially by
calumny.<note place='foot'><q>De hac significatione inter philologos nulla est dubitatio, confer Psal.
xxvi. (<hi rend='italic'>Hebr.</hi> 27) 2; Job xix. 22; Mich. iii. 3.</q>&mdash;Franz., <hi rend='italic'>De Euch.</hi>, Thes. iii.,
p. 22, note.</note> Such a figurative
sense, however, would be
absurd here; and hence Christ
must have been understood, and
must have spoken, in the literal
sense. See Wiseman's <hi rend='italic'>Lect. on
the Euch.</hi>, pp. 77-91.
</p>

<p>
(4) The disciples understood
our Lord to speak of a real
eating of His flesh and blood,
such as takes place only in the
Eucharist, and understood Him
correctly. Their words (verse
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
61), and their departure for ever
from Him (verse 67), show that
they understood Him of a real
eating; otherwise why should
they be offended or desert Him?
What had He said that was
new, or hard to take in, if He
merely spoke of the necessity of
faith in Himself or His doctrines?
Their action, then,
shows in what sense the disciples
understood Him; and
His action in permitting them
to depart, shows they understood
Him correctly.
</p>

<p>
(5) The Jews understood
Him of a real eating, which was
quite different from belief in
His doctrines or in Himself, and
which has no meaning unless
in reference to the Eucharist.
<q><emph>How</emph> can this man give us <hi rend='italic'>His
flesh</hi> to eat?</q> they said (verse 53);
and His solemn asseveration,
negatively (verse 54), and positively
(verse 55), shows that
He is inculcating the very truth
which they had questioned, and
which they were bound to
accept on His testimony, even
though they could not see <emph>how</emph>
it was to come to pass.
</p>

<p>
II. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Christ speaks of a real,
oral reception of His
body and blood, and not
merely of a spiritual
reception through faith
excited by the Sacrament.</hi>
</p>

<p>
(1) The manna with which
Christ compares the bread that
He will give (verses 49, 50, 59)
was really eaten; therefore,
also the bread, which is His
flesh (verse 52), is to be <emph>really</emph>
received.
</p>

<p>
(2) After the Jews had murmured,
Christ declared His
flesh to be <emph>truly</emph> meat, and His
blood to be <emph>truly</emph> drink (verse
56), and therefore it must be
truly and really received.
</p>

<p>
(3) In any sense other than
the literal, Christ's meaning
would be obscure, and His
words misleading; and our
Evangelist, according to his
ordinary practice (i. 41, 42; ii.
21; iv. 2; xii. 33), would explain.
But he does not explain;
therefore the language is not
obscure, and therefore the
literal sense was meant.
</p>

<p>
(4) See arguments (3), (4),
and (5) for the preceding proposition.
</p>

<p>
And now, having satisfied
ourselves that there is reference
to the Blessed Eucharist
in this chapter, and to a real,
oral reception of Christ in the
sacrament, let us try to decide
where that reference begins.
Some (as Wiseman, <hi rend='italic'>Lect. on
Euch.</hi>, p. 51, and foll.) say at
verse 48; others, at 51; and
others, at 52. But it seems much
more probable that the reference
begins before any of these
points; and Wiseman is certainly
mistaken when he states,
on page 48: <q>That Protestants
and Catholics are equally
agreed that the discourse, as
far as the 48th or 51st verse
refers entirely to believing
Christ. St. Cyril of Alex.,
Theophy., Toletus, Lucas of
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
Bruges, had held, before
Wiseman's time, that the reference
to the Blessed Eucharist
begins in verse 27</q>; and since
his time, Beelen, Perrone,
Corluy, Franzelin,<note place='foot'>Though Franz. holds that the discourse from verse 35-47 regards <emph>faith</emph>
in Christ, yet he holds that the Blessed Eucharist is referred to in verse 27.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>De
Euch. Thes.</hi>, iii., p. 15.</note> and others
have held the same.
</p>

<p>
The most probable view
seems to be that from verse 27,
wherever there is question of
the bread (verses 27, 32, 33, 35,
... 59), the Blessed Eucharist
is meant. Christ began in verse
27 to promise the Blessed Eucharist,
but the Jews interrupted
Him (verse 28), and their interruption
raised the question
of faith in Him, so that He
digressed for a time from His
main purpose to explain the
necessity of faith, in order to ensure a
fruitful reception of the Eucharist.
But though we admit
this digression, we hold that
wherever Christ refers to the
bread to be given, He means
the Blessed Eucharist, and that
the reference to it begins in
verse 27. For&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(1) In verse 27 He speaks of
a food that was still <emph>to be given
in the future</emph>, just as in verse
52, where all Catholics admit
there is question of the
Eucharist.
</p>

<p>
(2) This food was to be given
by the Son of Man, Christ
Himself; and though in verse
32 the Father is said to give it,
this is naturally explained by
saying that the Father gives
us in the Incarnation what
Christ gives in a sacramental
form in the Eucharist.
</p>

<p>
(3) The food in verse 27, is
a food for which, as we shall
see, faith is a <emph>preparation</emph>;
therefore, not itself faith.
</p>

<p>
(4) In verses 32, 33, there is
question of a bread that cometh
down from heaven, and giveth
life to the world, and in verse
59, of a bread to which the
very same properties are attributed;
and in both cases this
heaven-descended, life-giving
bread is contrasted with the
manna. Is it not natural,
then, to conclude, remembering
that both passages belong
to the same discourse, that
the same bread is meant in
both instances?
</p>

<p>
And now we have seen&mdash;(1)
that there is reference to
the Blessed Eucharist in this
discourse; (2) to a real reception
of Christ in it; and (3) that
the reference most probably
begins in verse 27. Having
got so far, it will not be very
difficult to interpret the discourse,
and to this we proceed
at once.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>27. Operamini non cibum
qui perit, sed qui permanet in
vitam aeternam, quem Filius
hominis dabit vobis. Hunc
enim Pater signavit Deus.</cell>
<cell>27. Labour not for the meat
which perisheth, but for that
which endureth unto life everlasting,
which the son of man
will give you. For him hath
God, the Father, sealed.</cell></row></table>

<p>
27. <hi rend='bold'>Labour not for the meat
which perisheth, but for that
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
which endureth unto life
everlasting.</hi> As our Version
indicates, the meat is the object
for the attainment of which
they are exhorted to do their
part. The meaning cannot be
that they are to <emph>make</emph> the food
by believing, as if the food
were faith; for they had not
<emph>made</emph> the bread in the desert
the previous day, nor were
they thinking of making it
now, but they were trying,
<emph>striving to obtain it</emph>. This
sacramental food will endure
<emph>in its effects</emph> unto eternal life.
This food <hi rend='bold'>the Son of Man will
give</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Christ as man will
give us His flesh; but since
the food is to endure in its
effects unto <emph>eternal life</emph>, mere
man could not give such; and
hence it is added that the
Father who is God has sealed
with the impress of Divinity
(August., Tolet.) the Son of
Man, who therefore, being God
as well as man, can give a
food that will endure unto
eternal life.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>28. Dixerunt ergo ad eum:
Quid faciemus ut operemur
opera Dei?</cell>
<cell>28. They said therefore unto
him: What shall we do that
we may work the works of
God?</cell></row>
<row><cell>29. Respondit Iesus, et
dixit eis: Hoc est opus Dei,
ut credatis in eum quem misit
ille.</cell>
<cell>29. Jesus answered, and said
to them: This is the work of
God, that you believe in him
whom he hath sent.</cell></row></table>

<p>
28-29. Some of His hearers
now interrupt Christ, not however
to inquire what this food
was, but to ask what they must
do on their part in order to
perform the works which they
take it for granted <emph>God requires</emph>,
before they may receive such
food. Christ's answer is, that
in order to obtain it, so that it
may remain unto eternal life,
they must believe in Himself.
So too is it even now; the
sinner may sacrilegiously
receive the Lord into his
breast, but it is only for Him
who believes (and acts accordingly)
that the Sacrament endureth
unto eternal life.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>30. Dixerunt ergo ei: Quod
ergo tu facis signum ut videamus,
et credamus tibi? quid
operaris!</cell>
<cell>30. They said therefore to
him: What sign therefore
dost thou show that we may
see, and may believe thee?
what dost thou work?</cell></row>
<row><cell>31. Patres nostri manducaverunt
manna in deserto,
sicut scriptum est: Panem de
coelo dedit eis manducare.</cell>
<cell>31. Our fathers did eat
manna in the desert, as it is
written, <hi rend='italic'>He gave them bread
from heaven to eat</hi>.</cell></row></table>

<p>
30-31. Christ having declared
the necessity of faith in Himself,
they now ask for motives
of credibility, and point to the
great standing miracle wrought
for their fathers in the desert.
But whereas He had demanded
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
faith in Himself: <q>That you
believe <emph>in Him</emph> whom He hath
sent</q> (verse 29), they seem to
miss the point, and speak not of
believing in Him, but merely of
believing Him, believing what
He may have to say to them.
They did not mention Moses,
nor was the manna given by
Moses; but our Lord's reply
shows that the comparison
between Himself and Moses
was in their minds. It is as if
they said: You call upon us
to believe you on the strength
of the miracle wrought yesterday
in the desert, whereas
Moses fed our <emph>whole race</emph> for
<emph>forty</emph> years with a bread <emph>from
heaven</emph>. These people who speak
thus, are probably different persons
from those who on the preceding
day recognised Christ as
the Messias (verse 14).
</p>

<anchor id='VI_32'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>32. Dixit ergo eis Iesus:
Amen, amen dico vobis: Non
Moyses dedit vobis panem de
coelo, sed Pater meus dat
vobis panem de coelo verum.</cell>
<cell>32. Then Jesus said to them:
Amen, amen, I say to you:
Moses gave you not bread
from heaven, but my Father
giveth you the true bread
from heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell>33. Panis enim Dei est qui
de coelo descendit, et dat
vitam mundo.</cell>
<cell>33. For the bread of God is
that which cometh down from
heaven, and giveth life to the
world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
32-33. They had asked for
some great miracle (comp.
Matt. xii. 38), but since they had
already had sufficient evidence
to enable them to believe,
Christ does not gratify their
desire, but proceeds to declare
that it was not Moses who
gave the manna, but God (see
Ps. lxxvii. 21-24); so that their
tacit comparison of Moses with
Himself is baseless. He then
goes on to declare that His
Father giveth them the true
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
bread from heaven. This means,
as we have already explained,
that the Father gave us in the
Incarnation what Christ gives
us in the Eucharist, namely,
the Person of the God-man.
That it is true or perfect bread,
He proves from the fact that it
comes, not like the manna from
the clouds, but from heaven
itself, and that it not merely
<emph>sustains</emph> the life of <emph>one people</emph>,
but <emph>gives</emph> life to the <emph>world</emph>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>34. Dixerunt ergo ad eum:
Domine, semper da nobis
panem hunc.</cell>
<cell>34. They said therefore unto
him: Lord, give us always
this bread.</cell></row>
<row><cell>35. Dixit autem eis Iesus:
Ego sam panis vitae, qui venit
ad me, non esuriet: et qui
credit in me, non sitiet unquam.</cell>
<cell>35. And Jesus said to them:
I am the bread of life: he that
cometh to me shall not hunger;
he that believeth in me,
shall never thirst.</cell></row></table>

<p>
34, 35. They at once ask
that He would give them this
bread always. They evidently
think that He speaks of some
excellent food like the manna,
which would support their
corporal existence, and they
desire to be constantly supplied
with it. But as they
know not <emph>what</emph> they ask, nor
<emph>how</emph> they should be disposed to
receive it, He tells them&mdash;(1)
What the bread is, namely,
Himself; and (2) what is required
for a proper and fruitful
reception of it, namely, faith in
Himself. The words: <hi rend='bold'>He that
cometh to Me</hi>, mean the same
thing as: <hi rend='bold'>He that believeth in
Me</hi>. The believer shall <hi rend='bold'>never
thirst</hi>; because, if he act
upon his belief, he will receive
Christ in the Eucharist, and be
spiritually filled, never again to
thirst, except through his own
fault.
</p>

<anchor id='VI_36'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>36. Sed dixi vobis, quia et
vidistis me, et non creditis.</cell>
<cell>36. But I said unto you, that
you also have seen me, and
you believe not.</cell></row>
<row><cell>37. Omne quod dat mihi
Pater, ad me veniet: et eum
qui venit ad me, non ejiciam
foras:</cell>
<cell>37. All that the Father giveth
me shall come to me; and him
that cometh to me, I will not
cast out.</cell></row></table>

<p>
36, 37. Christ again, as in verse
26, reproves their want of faith,
and declares that those who believe
in Him, do so through the
grace of the Father; and all
such He receives and rejects
not.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>38. Quia descendi de coelo,
non ut faciam voluntatem
meam sed voluntatem eius qui
misit me.</cell>
<cell>38. Because I came down
from heaven, not to do my
own will, but the will of him
that sent me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>39. Hac est autem voluntas
eius qui misit me, Patris: ut
omne quod dedit mihi, non
perdam ex eo, sed resuscitem
illud in novissimo die.</cell>
<cell>39. Now this is the will of
the Father who sent me; that
of all that he hath given me, I
should lose nothing, but should
raise it up again in the last day.</cell></row>
<row><cell>40. Haec est autem voluntas
Patris mei, qui misit me: ut
omnis qui videt Filium, et
credit in eum, habeat vitam
aeternam, et ego resuscitabo
eum in novissimo die.</cell>
<cell>40. And this is the will of
my Father that sent me; that
every one who seeth the Son,
and believeth in him, may
have life everlasting, and I will
raise him up in the last day.</cell></row></table>

<p>
38-40. He declares the reason
why He does not reject such:
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
because He came down on
earth to do His father's will;
and that will is that all who
recognize in Him the Son of
God and believe in Him as
such (acting according to that
belief), should be raised up to
a glorious life on the last day.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>41. Murmurabant ergo Iudaei
de illo, quia dixisset:
Ego sum panis vivus, qui de
coelo descendi.</cell>
<cell>41. The Jews therefore
murmured at him, because he
had said, I am the living bread
which came down from heaven.</cell></row>
<row><cell>42. Et dicebant: Nonne hic
est Iesus filius Ioseph, cuius
nos novimus patrem et matrem?
Quomodo ergo dicit hic: Quia
de coelo descendi?</cell>
<cell>42. And they said: Is not
this Jesus the son of Joseph,
whose father and mother we
know? How than saith he, I
came down from heaven?</cell></row>
<row><cell>43. Respondit ergo Iesus,
et dixit eis: Nolite murmurare
in invicem:</cell>
<cell>43. Jesus therefore answered
and said to them: Murmur
not among yourselves.</cell></row></table>

<p>
41-43. The Jews, by whom
the Scribes and Pharisees
perhaps are meant, now murmur
because He claims celestial
origin, whereas they fancy they
know Him to be an ordinary
man, born in the ordinary way
of an earthly father and mother.
He merely reproves their murmuring
without replying to
their difficulty, and proceeds to
declare the necessity of grace.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>44. Nemo potest venire ad
me, nisi Pater qui misit me
traxerit eum: et ego resuscitabo
eum in novissimo die.</cell>
<cell>44. No man can come to
me, except the Father, who
hath sent me, draw him, and
I will raise him up in the last
day.</cell></row></table>

<p>
44. No one can believe in
Him, unless the Father draw
him; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, by preventing and
assisting grace. We have here
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
a clear proof against the Pelagians,
for the necessity of
grace in order to faith. It
must be borne in mind that,
though we are drawn by God,
we are drawn by impulses of
grace which we are free to
resist.<note place='foot'><q>Noli te cogitare invitum trahi; trahitur animus et amore ... Ramum
viridem ostendis ovi, et trahis illam. Nuces puero demonstrantur et trahitur.</q>&mdash;St.
August.</note>
</p>

<anchor id='VI_45'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>45. Est scriptum in prophetis:
Et erunt omnes docibiles
Dei. Omnis qui audivit
a Patre, et didicit, venit ad
me.</cell>
<cell>45. It is written in the
prophets: <hi rend='italic'>And they all shall be
taught of God</hi>. Every one
that hath heard of the Father
and hath learned, cometh to me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
45. Christ declares <emph>how</emph> we
are drawn by the Father, namely,
by an illumination of the intellect
and motion of the will,
so that we hear (<q>audivit</q>)
and obey (<q>didicit</q>). <hi rend='bold'>It is
written in the Prophets:
And they shall all be taught
of God.</hi> The Jewish Scriptures
were divided into the Law,
the Prophets, and the Hagiographers,
and the reference
here is to the portion written
by the Prophets. The phrase:
<hi rend='bold'>They shall all be taught of
God</hi>, which is found substantially
in Isaias, liv. 13,
implies direct Divine teaching
through the influence of the
Spirit upon the mind and heart,
and indicates not merely one
Divine communication, but an
established relationship, for the
faithful who allow themselves
to be drawn, are life-long pupils
in the school of God.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>46. Non quia Patrem vidit
quisquam, nisi is qui est a
Deo, hic vidit Patrem.</cell>
<cell>46. Not that any man hath
seen the Father, but he who
is of God, he hath seen the
Father.</cell></row></table>

<p>
46. <hi rend='bold'>Not that any man hath
seen the Father.</hi> It is, says
St. Augustine, <q>as if He said:
Do not when I tell you: Every
man that hath heard and
learned of the Father, say to
yourselves: We have never
seen the Father, and how then
can we have learned from
Him? Hear Him then in Me, I
know the Father, and am from
Him.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>47. Amen, amen dico vobis:
Qui credit in me, habet vitam
aeternam.</cell>
<cell>47. Amen, amen, I say unto
you: He that believeth in me
hath everlasting life.</cell></row></table>

<p>
47. Having pointed out the
necessity of faith (verse 29), its
sufficiency (verse 35), and the necessary
condition to it, namely,
the grace of God and correspondence
therewith (verses 44,
45), He now solemnly repeats
what He had declared in verses
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
35 and 37, that he who believes
in Him shall have eternal life.
The present tense, <hi rend='bold'>hath everlasting
life</hi>, need create no
difficulty here: for he who
believes will receive the Blessed
Eucharist, the food <q>that endureth
unto everlasting life,</q>
(verse 57); and the present
tense is so used to indicate
the certainty with which the
result will follow.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>48. Ego sum panis vitae.</cell>
<cell>48. I am the bread of life.</cell></row>
<row><cell>49. Patres vestri manducaverunt
manna in deserto, et
mortui sunt.</cell>
<cell>49. Your fathers did eat
manna in the desert, and are
dead.</cell></row>
<row><cell>50. Hic est panis de coelo
descendens: ut si quis ex
ipso manducaverit, non moriatur.</cell>
<cell>50. This is the bread which
cometh down from heaven:
that if any man eat of it, he
may not die.</cell></row>
<row><cell>51. Ego sum panis vivus,
qui de coelo descendi.</cell>
<cell>51. I am the living bread,
which came down from heaven.</cell></row></table>

<p>
48-51. Before quitting this
portion of His discourse, and
going on to declare <emph>how</emph> He is
the bread of life, Christ sums
up what He has said, repeating
again the proposition laid down
in verse 35: <q>I am the bread
of life;</q> again comparing and
preferring the Blessed Eucharist
to the manna (49, 50 compared
with 32, 35); and combining in
one the two propositions contained
in verses 35 and 38,
namely, that He is the bread,
and that He came down from
heaven. In verse 50 where it
is declared that he who eats
this bread shall not die, the
meaning is, that the Blessed
Eucharist, <emph>of its own nature</emph>, is
calculated to save us from the
death of the soul, and to secure
even for our bodies a glorious
resurrection. Sin, of course,
may rob it of its glorious effects.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>52. Si quis manducaverit ex
hoc pane, vivet in aeternuum:
et panis, quem ego dabo, caro
mea est pro mundi vita.</cell>
<cell>52. If any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever:
and the bread that I will give,
is my flesh for the life of the
world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
52. Having summed up the
preceding portion of His discourse,
Christ now proceeds to
declare <emph>how</emph> He is the bread of
life. Till now He had contented
Himself with declaring that He
is that bread, and with pointing
out the chief disposition necessary
to receive Him worthily;
now He goes further, and points
out <emph>how</emph> He will be the bread
of life; namely, by giving His
flesh, that is, His whole human
nature (i. 14), to which the
Divine nature is inseparably
united, to be received in the
Blessed Eucharist. Thus He
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
gradually unfolds the mystery,
reserving till the last supper the
further knowledge, that this
reception of His body and blood
was to take place in a sacramental
manner.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And the bread that I will
give is my flesh, for the life
of the world.</hi> Many Greek
MSS. read: <q>And the bread
that I will give is My flesh,
<emph>which I will give</emph> for the life
of the world.</q> If the words
<q>which I will give</q> be genuine,
we would explain them not in
reference to the sacrifice of the
cross, but in reference to the
sacrifice of the Eucharist, in
which Christ is given for us
and to us. Compare St. Luke:
<q>This is My body, which is <emph>given
for you</emph></q> (Luke, xxii. 19), and
especially Luke xxii. 20, where
the Greek text shows that it is
the blood <emph>as in the chalice</emph>
(and not as on Calvary) that is
said to be offered in sacrifice.
But the words more probably
are not genuine; they are
omitted by Lachmann, Tischendorf,
Tregelles, Westcott, and
Hort, and by the Revised Version,
as well as by the Vulgate.
</p>

<p>
Though not merely Christ's
flesh, that is, His humanity
(i. 14), but also His Divinity,
is received in the Blessed
Eucharist, His human nature
is specially mentioned, lest it
should be thought that He is
the living bread only as God,
or merely spiritually. <q>Dixerat
enim,</q> says St. Thomas on this
verse. <q>Quod erat panis vivus;
et ne intelligatur quod hoc ei
esset in quantum est Verbum,
vel secundum animam tantum,
ideo ostendit quod etiam caro
sua vivificativa est: est enim
organum divinitatis suae: unde,
cum instrumentum agat virtute
agentis, sicut divinitas
Christi vivificativa est, ita et
caro virtute Verbi adjuncti vivificat;
unde Christus tactu suo
sanabat infirmos.</q> Besides, as
St. Thomas adds, since this
Sacrament is commemorative
of our Lord's Passion (<q>For
as often as you shall eat this
bread, and drink the chalice,
you shall show the death of
the Lord,</q> 1 Cor. xi. 26), His
<q>flesh</q> is mentioned to remind
us of the weakness of that
human nature wherein it was
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
possible for Him who was God
to suffer.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>53. Litigabant ergo Iudaei
ad invicem, dicentes: Quomodo
potest hic nobis carnem
suam suam dare ad manducandum?</cell>
<cell>53. The Jews therefore
strove among themselves
saying: How can this man
give us his flesh to eat?</cell></row>
<row><cell>54. Dixit ergo eis Iesus:
Amen, amen dico vobis: Nisi
manducaveritis carnem Filii
hominis, et biberitis eius sanguinem,
non habebitis vitam in
vobis.</cell>
<cell>54. Then Jesus said to them:
Amen, amen, I say unto you;
Except you eat the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his
blood, you shall not have life
in you.</cell></row>
<row><cell>55. Qui manducat meam
carnem, et bibit meum sanguinem,
habet vitam aeternam:
et ego resuscitabo eum in
novissimo die.</cell>
<cell>55. He that eateth my flesh,
and drinketh my blood, hath
everlasting life: and I will
raise him up in the last day.</cell></row></table>

<p>
53-55. The Jews <hi rend='bold'>therefore</hi>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ergo</foreign>, not enim), because of
what He had now said, disputed
among themselves, evidently
taking different views of what
He had said; but Jesus, far
from retracting, solemnly insists
upon what He had just
said, and declares negatively
(verse 54), and positively (verse
55), not only the possibility, but
the <emph>necessity</emph> of receiving His
body and blood. It does not
follow from verse 54, as the
Utraquists falsely contended,
that Communion under both
kinds is necessary; for Christ
is received whole and entire
under either species. Under the
species of bread only the body
is present <emph>in virtue of the words
of consecration</emph>, and similarly
under the species of wine only
the blood; but since Christ's
body is now a <emph>living</emph> body, it
follows that in the Blessed
Eucharist, where the body is,
there also are the blood and
the soul <emph>in virtue of the natural
connection</emph> between the parts
of a living body, and there,
too, the Divinity, <emph>in virtue of the
hypostatic union</emph>. See Decrees
of the Council of Trent, sess.
xiii., ch. 3. The precept is to
receive both body and blood,
but not necessarily under both
species. For, as the Council
of Trent (sess. xxi., cap. 1)
points out, Christ attributes the
same effects to eating in verses
55, 58, 59, as He does here to
eating and drinking. See also
1 Cor. xi. 26, where he who eats
<emph>or</emph> drinks unworthily, is said
to be guilty of <emph>both</emph> body and
blood. The precept of Christ,
then, is obeyed whether one
or both species be received,
and it is a disciplinary matter
entrusted to the care of the
Church, whether the faithful
are to receive under one or
both species.
</p>

<p>
Seeing, then, that there is
no obligation for the faithful to
receive the Blessed Eucharist
under both species, it may be
asked why does Christ mention
both species? We reply, that
He does so to signify that in
the Blessed Eucharist there is
a perfect repast, which ordinarily
supposes the presence
of both meat and drink; and,
perhaps, also to indicate that
this sacrament is commemorative
of His death, in which His
body and blood were separated.
</p>

<p>
Nor do verses 54 and 55
afford any proof that the
Blessed Eucharist is necessary,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitate medii</foreign> unto salvation,
like Baptism (John iii. 5).
For&mdash;(1) Baptism is declared
to be absolutely necessary for
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
all, <q>unless a man be born
again;</q> here the Blessed
Eucharist is declared necessary
only for those who
are capable of receiving a
precept, <q>Unless you eat,</q> &amp;c.
(2) From the nature of the
case, Baptism, being a new
<emph>birth</emph>, is absolutely necessary
for all who are to live the new
spiritual life; and as many as
are born, must be <emph>born again</emph>
in order to live the higher life;
but the Blessed Eucharist is
not the introduction to a new
life, but a means of nourishing
the life already acquired.
Hence for children who have
already acquired that spiritual
life in Baptism, and cannot
lose it because incapable of
sinning, the Blessed Eucharist
cannot be necessary to salvation,
nor even for adults can it
be absolutely necessary as a
means, if there be, as there
are, other means of retaining
the life already acquired.
</p>

<anchor id='VI_56'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>56. Caro enim mea, vere est
cibus: et sanguis meus, vere
est potus.</cell>
<cell>56. For my flesh is meat
indeed: and my blood is drink
indeed;</cell></row>
<row><cell>57. Qui manducat meam
carnem, et bibit meum sanguinem,
in me manet, et ego in
illo.</cell>
<cell>57. He that eateth my flesh
and drinketh my blood, abideth
in me, and I in him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
57. In the Blessed Eucharist
we are united to Christ, and
His humanity remains in us
until the sacred species become
corrupted; His divinity, until
mortal sin is committed, and He
is expelled.
</p>

<anchor id='VI_58'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>58. Sicut misit me vivens
Pater, et ego vivo propter
Patrem: et qui manducat me,
et ipse vivet propter me.</cell>
<cell>58. As the living Father
hath sent me, and I live by
the Father: so he that eateth
me, the same also shall live by
me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
58. The sacred union between
Christ and the communicant is
compared to the ineffable union
between Him and His heavenly
Father.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>The living Father.</hi> This is
a unique instance of this title,
but we frequently find: <hi rend='italic'>The
Living God</hi>, Matt. xvi. 16;
2 Cor. vi. 16, &amp;c. <hi rend='bold'>And I live
by</hi> (διὰ τὸν παπέρα) <hi rend='bold'>the Father</hi>.
It is to be noted that διὰ is
followed by the accusative, not
the genitive. If, then, we are
to regard it as meaning here
what it ordinarily means when
followed by the accusative, and
as the Vulgate seems to take it,
the sense would rather be: As
the living Father hath sent Me,
and I live <emph>on account</emph> of the
Father, so he that eateth Me,
the same also shall live <emph>on
account</emph> of Me. This would
mean that as complete devotion
to the Father is the object of
the life of the Incarnate Son
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
(the Son <emph>as sent</emph>), so complete
devotion to the Son shall be
the object of the life of him to
whom Christ shall have united
Himself in the Blessed Eucharist.
Others, however, think
that διὰ is here equivalent to
<emph>through</emph>, or <emph>by</emph>, as in our Rheims
Version. The sense then is:
as Christ lives through the
eternal life communicated to
Him in His eternal generation
by the Father; so, in some
way, the communicant shall live
in virtue of the spiritual life
communicated to him or sustained
in him because of his
union with Christ in the Blessed
Eucharist.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>59. Hic est panis qui de
coelo descendit. Non sicut
manducaverunt patres vestri
manna, et mortui sunt. Qui
manducat hunc panem, vivet
in aeternum.</cell>
<cell>59. This is the bread that
came down from heaven.
Not as your fathers did eat
manna, and are dead. He
that eateth this bread shall
live for ever.</cell></row></table>

<p>
59. This verse concludes and
unites the principal points of
the discourse. Compare verses
32, 41, 49, 50, 52, 55. Hence
it confirms the view we have
followed regarding the unity
of subject throughout the discourse.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>He that eateth this bread
shall live for ever.</hi> With this
encouraging and glorious promise,
made not to any one
people, nor to any class as
such, not even to all believers,
but to each one (note the change
from the plural to the singular:
<hi rend='italic'>your fathers ... He that eateth</hi>)
who shall worthily receive,
and duly profit by the Blessed
Eucharist, the discourse ends.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>60. Haec dixit in synagoga
docens, in Capharnaum.</cell>
<cell>60. These things he said
teaching in the synagogue, in
Capharnaum.</cell></row></table>

<p>
60. Because of the solemn
importance of the discourse, the
place where it was delivered is
noted. At Tell Hûm (see above
on <ref target='II_12'>ii. 12</ref>) the ruins of a large
synagogue are still to be seen.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>61. Multi ergo audientes
ex discipulis eius, dixerunt:
Durus est hic sermo, et quis
potest eum audire?</cell>
<cell>61. Many therefore of his
disciples hearing it, said:
This saying is hard, and who
can hear it?</cell></row></table>

<p>
61. The effect of the <emph>discourse</emph>
upon many of the
disciples is recorded. <hi rend='bold'>Hard</hi>
(σκληρός), <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, harsh, hard to
accept.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>62. Sciens autem Iesus apud
semetipsum quia murmurarent
de hoc discipuli eius, dixit
eis: Hoc vos scandalizat?</cell>
<cell>62. But Jesus knowing in
himself, that his disciples murmured at this, said to them:
Doth this scandalize you?</cell></row></table>

<p>
62. The Evangelist notes,
according to his custom, that
their thoughts were known to
Christ.
</p>

<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>63. Si ergo videritis Filium
hominis ascendentem ubi erat
prius?</cell>
<cell>63. If then you shall see the
son of man ascend up where
he was before?</cell></row></table>

<p>
63. <hi rend='bold'>If then you shall see the
son of man ascend up where
he was before?</hi> The sense
according to some, is: If you
shall see Me ascending into
heaven, it will then be easier to
believe My doctrine, seeing I
am Divine; and you shall at
the same time understand, that
it is not in a bloody manner (as
you suppose) that you are to eat
My body. Thus He would
correct their too carnal interpretation
of His words, and
point at the same time to a
reason why the true sense, however
difficult, was to be
accepted. Others think that
Christ's words increase the
difficulty, the sense being, if you
are scandalized now, because I
say, <emph>while present with you</emph>, that
I will give My body, how much
more will you be scandalized
when you see that body taken
away into heaven, and are yet
asked to believe that it is to be
eaten on earth? It is argued in
favour of this opinion, that the
form of Christ's reply: <q>Does
this scandalize you? If <emph>therefore</emph>,</q>
&amp;c., indicates that their
difficulty would then be greater.
So Mald., Tolet., Beel., Corl.
We may remark, as against
the Nestorians, that language
could not signify more clearly
than this verse signifies the
unity of Person in Christ. The
Son of Man will ascend to
heaven where as Son of God
He is from all eternity. <q>Filius
Dei et hominis unus Christus
... Filius Dei in terra suscepta
carne, Filius hominis in
coelo in unitate personae.</q> St.
Aug. on this verse.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>64. Spiritus est, qui vivificat:
caro non prodest quidquam:
verba quae ego locutus
sum vobis, spiritus et vita
sunt.</cell>
<cell>64. It is the spirit that
quickeneth: the flesh profiteth
nothing. The words that I
have spoken to you, are spirit
and life.</cell></row></table>

<p>
64. Many interpretations of
this verse have been advanced.
The following two are the most
probable, intrinsically and extrinsically:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(1) <hi rend='bold'>The spirit</hi> is the spirit
of man elevated and ennobled
by grace; <hi rend='bold'>the flesh</hi>, the
corrupt dispositions and weak
thoughts of human nature unaided
by grace (see Rom. viii.
5, 6); and the meaning of the
verse is; it is the mind illumined
by grace that quickeneth to
faith and to a proper understanding
of My words; the
mind or human nature by itself
is of no avail in such matters;
the words which I have spoken
to you are <emph>to be understood by</emph>
the mind quickened and illumined
by grace. So St. Chrys.,
Teoph., Wisem., Perr., M'Ev.
But there are serious difficulties
against this view&mdash;(1) <q>caro</q>
is then taken metaphorically in
this verse, while throughout the
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
context it has been taken literally
of the flesh of Christ; (2) the
explanation of the words <q>are
spirit and life</q> is unnatural.
</p>

<p>
(2) Others take <hi rend='bold'>the Spirit</hi>
of the Divinity of Christ, <hi rend='bold'>the
flesh</hi> of His humanity considered
apart from the Divinity;
and the meaning of the verse
then is: it is My Divinity that
quickeneth, and maketh My
flesh a meat enduring unto
eternal life; the flesh if separated
from the Divinity would
profit nothing; the words
which I have spoken to you
regard My life-giving Divinity
as united to My humanity. In
this view, as Mald. explains it,
<q>life,</q> by a Hebraism, is equivalent
to an adjective signifying
<emph>life-giving</emph>, as may be
inferred from the beginning of
the verse, where it is said
that it is the Spirit <emph>that giveth
life</emph>.<note place='foot'>See, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, above iii. 6: What is born of the spirit is spirit; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, spiritual.</note> Hence <q>Spirit and life</q>
is equivalent to <emph>life-giving</emph>
Spirit, and the latter part of
the verse means that Christ's
words have reference to His
life-giving Divinity in union
with His humanity. So, too,
St. Cyril of Alex., Beel., Corl.
We prefer this view, and hold
that Christ here gives the key
to the solution of the difficulty
on account of which His disciples
had murmured (verse 62).
He had closed His discourse
with words attributing eternal
life to the eating of His flesh
(verse 59); they murmured accordingly,
thinking it absurd or
incredible that such effect could
follow from such a cause as the
eating of a man's flesh; and
in verse 64 He explains that
His flesh is the flesh of the
Man-God, which therefore
through the quickening influence
of the Divinity with
which it is united, is capable
of producing such marvellous
effects.
</p>

<p>
There is not a shadow of
probability in the interpretation
put upon this verse by the
Sacramentarians. They explained
the verse to mean: that
the <emph>figurative</emph> sense of what He
had said regarding the necessity
of eating His flesh and
blood profits, but that the
<emph>literal</emph> sense would profit
nothing. Thus they professed
to find in these words an assurance
that Christ had not
spoken of a real eating of His
flesh in the Eucharist, but only
of a spiritual reception of Himself
through faith. In reply to
this we say&mdash;(1) that throughout
the rest of the Bible
<q>spiritus</q> and <q>caro</q> are
not even once used of a figurative
and literal sense; (2) if
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
Christ here gave the explanation
which our adversaries
suppose, how is it that, as we
learn from verse 67, many of His
disciples retired notwithstanding,
and walked with Him no
more? In such an explanation
all their difficulty would be
removed, and they would be
taught that it was only of a
figurative eating by faith that
Christ had been speaking. How
then account for their departure?
But it was different in the explanation
we have given above.
In our view, Christ, still insisting
on a real reception of His
flesh, merely explains how it is
that such real reception can
lead to such glorious results.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>65. Sed sunt quidam ex
vobis, qui non credunt.
Sciebat enim ab initio Iesus
qui essent non credentes, et
quis traditurus esset eum.</cell>
<cell>65. But there are some of
you that believe not. For
Jesus knew from the beginning
who they were that did not
believe, and who he was that
would betray him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
65. In the view we hold
regarding verse 64, the connection
of this verse with it is: the
fact that I am God explains
what you find difficult in My
words (verse 64); but some of you
do not believe Me to be God;
and hence your difficulty (verse
65). To indicate Christ's Divine
knowledge, the Evangelist
adds that He knew <emph>from the
beginning</emph>, &amp;c.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>66. Et dicebat: Propterea
dixi vobis, quia nemo potest
venire ad me, nisi fuerit ei
datum a Patre meo.</cell>
<cell>66. And he said: Therefore
did I say to you, that no man
can come to me, unless it be
given him by my Father.</cell></row></table>

<p>
66. Christ's words in this
verse are to be connected
closely with the beginning of
the preceding, the intervening
words of the Evangelist being
parenthetical.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Therefore did I say to you.</hi>
The allusion is to what was
said above (verse 44), which is
substantially the same as what
is said here, since to be drawn
to Christ by the Father is
nothing else than to be given
grace by the Father to come to
Christ. It might seem at first
sight that these words excuse
the incredulity of those whom
Christ addresses; but it is not
so. For, the reason they had
not been drawn by the Father
was because they <emph>would</emph> not,
because they had not followed
the promptings of grace. See
above on verse <ref target='VI_45'>45</ref>. <q>Peccabant
tamen qui nolebant venire,
id est credere in Christum, tum
quia habebant gratiam sufficientem,
qua possent credere
si vellent, etsi non haberent
efficacem, qua reipsa et actu
crederent; tum quia humiliter
non petebant a Deo gratiam
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
efficacem, qua actu crederent:
tum quia sua superbia aliisque
peccatis illa gratia se fecerant
indignos, imo pervicaces Dei
gratiam et fidem repellebant et
refutabant</q> (A Lap. on this
verse).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>67. Ex hoc multi discipulorum
eius abierunt retro: et
iam non cum illo ambulabant.</cell>
<cell>67. After this many of his
disciples went back; and
walked no more with him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
67. Had Christ in the preceding
discourse spoken only
of faith, surely, all-merciful and
loving as He is, He would have
made His meaning clear, before
allowing many of His disciples
to depart from Him for ever.
It was only, then, because they
understood Him correctly, and
refused to believe Him, that He
allowed them to depart.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>68. Dixit ergo Iesus ad
duodecim: Numquid et vos
vultis abire?</cell>
<cell>68. Then Jesus said to the
twelve: will you also go
away?</cell></row></table>

<p>
68. <hi rend='bold'>The twelve.</hi> These
are spoken of as well known,
though this is the first
mention made of their number
in this Gospel.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Will you also go away?</hi>
While the question implies that
such desertion was to be feared,
its form implies a negative
answer, and suggests that in
the case of the chosen twelve
such conduct ought to be impossible.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>69. Respondit ergo ei Simon
Petrus: Domine, ad quem
ibimus? verba vitae aeternae
habes:</cell>
<cell>69. And Simon Peter
answered him: Lord, to
whom shall we go? thou hast
the words of eternal life.</cell></row>
<row><cell>70. Et nos credidimus, et
cognovimus quia tu es Christus
Filius Dei.</cell>
<cell>70. And we have believed
and have known that thou art
the Christ the Son of God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
69-70. Peter replies for all
the Apostles (not knowing the
unbelief of Judas), and confesses
the truth of Christ's doctrine,
and, according to the
Vulgate reading, the Divinity
of Christ. It is very doubtful,
however, whether the Vulgate
reading here is correct. The
oldest Greek MSS. read:
<q>And we have believed and
know that Thou art the <emph>Holy One</emph>
(ὁ ἅγιος) of God.</q> Whether in
the mind of St. Peter this latter
form of the words meant a full
confession of Christ's Divinity,
or only that He was the Messias,
it is difficult to say. It would
seem indeed from the praise
bestowed upon Peter by our
Lord (Matt. xvi. 16) on an
occasion subsequent to this,
that then for the first time
Peter fully confessed Christ's
Divinity.
</p>

<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>71. Respondit eis Iesus:
Nonne ego vos duodecim
elegi, et ex vobis unus diabolus
est?</cell>
<cell>71. Jesus answered them:
Have not I chosen you twelve;
and one of you is a devil?</cell></row></table>

<p>
71. Peter had answered as
he thought for all the Apostles,
but Christ shows that He knows
to the contrary. <hi rend='bold'>A devil</hi>,
that is to say a sinner inspired
by the devil (viii. 44), Judas
was (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>est</foreign>) even then.
</p>

<anchor id='VI_72'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>72. Dicebat autem Iudam
Simonis Iscariotem: hic enim
erat traditurus eum, cum esset
unus ex duodecim.</cell>
<cell>72. Now he meant Judas
Iscariot, the son of Simon:
for this same was about to
betray him, whereas he was
one of the twelve.</cell></row></table>

<p>
72. The Evangelist explains
who was meant. <q>The name
Iscariot has received many
interpretations, more or less
conjectural, but it is now universally
agreed that it is to be
derived from Kerioth (Josh.
xv. 25) a city in the tribe of
Judah, the Hebrew אישׂ קרִות 'īsh
Kerīyoth passing into Ἰσκαριώτης</q>
(Smith's <hi rend='italic'>B. D.</hi>, 2nd Ed.).
In this view, Judas, unlike the
other Apostles (Acts ii. 7),
was from the Province of
Judea.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1. <hi rend='bold'>Christ remains in Galilee.</hi>
</p>

<p>
2-10. <hi rend='bold'>His brethren urge Him to go up to Jerusalem to the Feast of
Tabernacles with them; this He declines to do, but goes afterwards
privately.</hi>
</p>

<p>
11-13. <hi rend='bold'>The chief men among the Jews look out for Him at the Feast,
and express different opinions regarding Him.</hi>
</p>

<p>
14-24. <hi rend='bold'>In the middle of the festival Christ goes up to the temple and teaches.</hi>
</p>

<p>
25-29. <hi rend='bold'>Comments of some of the people of Jerusalem; Christ's reply.</hi>
</p>

<p>
30, 31. <hi rend='bold'>Different opinions of the people regarding Him.</hi>
</p>

<p>
32-36. <hi rend='bold'>Jealously of the Sanhedrim, which sends officers to arrest Him.</hi>
</p>

<p>
37-39. <hi rend='bold'>Christ's words on the eighth day of the feast, and St. John's
authentic interpretation.</hi>
</p>

<p>
40, 41. <hi rend='bold'>Different opinions among the people regarding Him.</hi>
</p>

<p>
44-49. <hi rend='bold'>Though some were anxious to arrest Him, no one durst, not even
the officers who had been sent for that purpose; consequent
indignation of the Priests and Pharisees.</hi>
</p>

<p>
50-52. <hi rend='bold'>Nicodemus interposes in Christ's favour; reply of the other
members of the Sanhedrim.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<anchor id='VII_1'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Post haec autem ambulabat
Iesus in Galilaeam, non
enim volebat in Iudaeam
ambulare, quia quaerebant
eum Iudaei interficere.</cell>
<cell>1. After these things Jesus
walked in Galilee, for he
would not walk in Judea,
because the Jews sought to
kill him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. Instead of <q>Galilaeam,</q>
<q>Judaeam,</q> read <q>Galilea,</q>
<q>Judaea</q> (Abl.) in the Vulgate.
The sense is that Christ
continues to remain in Galilee.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. Erat autem in proximo dies
festus Iudaeorum scenopegia.</cell>
<cell>2. Now the Jews' feast of
tabernacles was at hand.</cell></row></table>

<anchor id='VII_2'/>
<p>
2. See note on verse <ref target='VII_1'>1</ref>.
</p>

<anchor id='VII_3'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Dixerunt autem ad eum
fratres eius: Transi hinc, et
vade in Iudaeam, ut et discipuli
tui videant opera tua,
quae facis.</cell>
<cell>3. And his brethren said to
him: Pass from hence and go
into Judea: that thy disciples
also may see thy works which
thou dost.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. <hi rend='bold'>His brethren said to
him: Pass from hence, and
go into Judea, that thy
disciples also may see thy
works which thou dost.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Who are these brethren of
Jesus?
</p>

<p>
(1) Not the children of
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
Joseph and Mary, born to them
after the birth of our Lord, for
this opinion of Helvidius was
condemned as <emph>heretical</emph> in the
Council of Lateran (649 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>),
and is opposed to the universal
and constant tradition of the
Church.<note place='foot'>Even Renan, who had held this view in the <hi rend='italic'>Vie de Jesus</hi> abandoned it in
a later work: <hi rend='italic'>Les Evangiles</hi>, Appendix, page 542.</note>
</p>

<p>
(2) Not the children of
Joseph by a previous marriage;
for this opinion too, though
not heretical, and though held
by some of the fathers, is
opposed to the common opinion
of Catholics, according to
which St. Joseph lived and died
a virgin.
</p>

<p>
(3) These brethren were
<emph>cousins</emph> of our Lord. The term
<q>fratres</q> (ἀδελφοὶ) is used
in the Sacred Scriptures of
many who are not children of
the same parents. Thus it is
used of fellow-countrymen,
Rom. ix. 3, 4; (2) of co-religionists,
Rom. i. 13; (3) of
relations who were not, however,
members of the same
family, Gen. xiii. 8, xiv. 4.
In these verses of Genesis,
Abraham and Lot are referred
to as <emph>brethren</emph>, though the
former was uncle to the latter
(Gen. xii. 5).
</p>

<p>
In Matthew xiii. 55, Mark
vi. 3, James, Joseph, Simon,
and Jude, are named as
brethren of our Lord; but
whether they are the same
cousins who are referred to
here by St. John, is disputed.
Of those mentioned by SS.
Matthew and Mark, James,
Jude, and probably Simon,
were Apostles;<note place='foot'>That James the brother of the Lord was an Apostle, is proved from
Gal. i. 19. See also Acts ix. 27, 28. Now Jude, the author of the short
Epistle which bears his name, who is commonly referred to as identical with
Jude the Apostle, calls himself a brother of James (only James the Less, the
brother of the Lord, and well-known bishop of Jerusalem can be meant).
Jude 1; hence, two at least, of the brothers of the Lord mentioned by
Matthew (xiii. 55), Mark (vi. 3), were Apostles: and since the Apostle Simon is
mentioned side by side with them in the four lists of the Apostles, it is fairly
concluded that he was their brother Simon; hence three of these brethren
of the Lord were Apostles.</note> and hence, on
account of verse 5, some say it
is not these, but other cousins
of our Lord, who are here referred
to by St. John. However,
there need be no difficulty
about admitting that the faith
of the Apostles was still imperfect,
especially if we adopt
what seems the more probable
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
reading in vi. 70. See Matthew
xvii. 19, 20; Mark xvi. 15.
</p>

<p>
These brethren of the Lord
say to Him, that He ought to
go up to Jerusalem, where there
would be a concourse of people
to witness His miracles.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Nemo quippe in occulto
quid facit, et quaerit ipse in
palam esse: si haec facis,
manifesta teipsum mundo.</cell>
<cell>4. For there is no man that
doth anything in secret, and
he himself seeketh to be
known openly. If thou do
these things, manifest thyself
to the world.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Neque enim fratres eius
credebant in eum.</cell>
<cell>5. For neither did his
brethren believe in him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
5. As already explained, if
we regard the three Apostles
as included among the
brethren, we may understand
here that their faith was still
<emph>imperfect</emph>; if other cousins of
our Lord are meant, they may
have been wholly without faith.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Dicit ergo eis Iesus:
Tempus meum nondum
advenit: tempus autem
vestrum semper est paratum.</cell>
<cell>6. Then Jesus said to them:
My time is not yet come; but
your time is always ready.</cell></row></table>

<p>
6. There are many opinions
as to what is meant by <emph>His
time</emph>, here referred to by Christ.
Some say it is the time of His
passion; others, the time for
manifesting Himself to the
world; and others, the time
for going up to Jerusalem.
The latter opinion seems to us
the most natural and most
probable.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Non potest mundus
odisse vos: me autem odit,
quia ego testimonium perhibeo
de illo quod opera eius mala
sunt.</cell>
<cell>7. The world cannot hate
you; but me it hateth:
because I give testimony of it,
that the works thereof are
evil.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. His brethren might go up
to Jerusalem at any time, for
they, even if some of them
were Apostles, had not yet
incurred the odium of the
<emph>wicked</emph> world (John xv. 18, 19).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>8. Vos ascendite ad diem
festum hunc: ego autem non
ascendo ad diem festum istum,
quia meum tempus nondum
impletum est.</cell>
<cell>8. Go you up to this festival
day, but I go not up to this
festival day: because my time
is not accomplished.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Haec cum dixisset, ipse
mansit in Galilaea.</cell>
<cell>9. When he had said these
things, he himself staid in
Galilee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Ut autem ascenderunt
fratres eius, tunc et ipse
ascendit ad diem festum non
manifeste, sed quasi in occulto.</cell>
<cell>10. But after his brethren
were gone up, then he also
went up to the feast, not
openly, but as it were in secret.</cell></row></table>

<p>
8-10. Christ here seems to
say that He will not go up
to Jerusalem for the feast,
and yet He went. Various
answers to this difficulty have
been given:&mdash;(1) Many ancient
MSS. and versions, instead of
<q>Non (οὐκ) ascendo</q> read
<q><emph>Nondum</emph> (οὔπω) ascendo;</q>
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, I go not up <emph>yet</emph>. However,
as this is the easier
reading to explain, and as the
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
other is equally well supported
by ancient authority, we are
inclined to believe that the
more difficult (οὐκ) is the true
reading. Hence (2) others say
that our Lord used an ambiguous
phrase: I go not up,
meaning I go not up <emph>now</emph> (but
shall go afterwards). (3) The
correct explanation seems to
be that insinuated by our Evangelist.
Christ said: I go not
up (as you desire, in your
company, and publicly); then
when He went up, it was not
publicly, but, as it were, in
secret.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. Iudaei ergo quaerebant
eum in die festo, et dicebant:
Ubi est ille?</cell>
<cell>11. The Jews therefore
sought him on the festival day
and said: Where is he?</cell></row></table>

<p>
11. The leaders of the Jews
seek Him at the feast, but,
through contempt, do not name
Him.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Et murmur multum erat
in turba de eo. Quidam enim
dicebant: Quia bonus est.
Alii autem dicebant: Non,
sed seducit turbas.</cell>
<cell>12. And there was much
murmuring among the multitude
concerning him. For
some said: He is a good man.
And others said: No, but he
seduceth the people.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13. Nemo tamen palam
loquebatur de illo, propter
metum Iudaeorum.</cell>
<cell>13. Yet no man spoke
openly of him, for fear of the
Jews.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. <hi rend='bold'>Openly</hi> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>palam</foreign>) does
not fully express the force of
the Greek word, which seems
to mean here <emph>with open approval</emph>.
</p>

<anchor id='VII_14'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Iam autem die festo
mediante, ascendit Iesus in
templum, et docebat.</cell>
<cell>14. Now about the midst of
the feast, Jesus went up into
the temple, and taught.</cell></row></table>

<p>
14. The festival lasted for
eight days, so that this would
be the fourth or fifth day.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>15. Et mirabantur Iudaei,
dicentes: Quomodo hic litteras
scit, cum non didicerit?</cell>
<cell>15. And the Jews wondered,
saying: How doth this man
know letters, having never
learned?</cell></row></table>

<p>
15. From this verse it is
plain that Christ had never
attended any of the Jewish
schools, where the <emph>Scriptures</emph>
(γράμματα) were explained.
</p>

<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>

<anchor id='VII_16'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Respondit eis Iesus, et
dixit: Mea doctrina non est
mea, sed eius qui misit me.</cell>
<cell>16. Jesus answered them
and said: My doctrine is not
mine, but his that sent me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. The sense is: The doctrine
I preach has not been
excogitated by Me; I have
received it from My Father.
As man, Christ had received
His knowledge through the
beatific vision, and by infusion
into His human soul, and as
God, He had received it from
the Father from all eternity.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Si quis voluerit voluntatem
eius facere, cognoscet de
doctrina utrum ex Deo sit, an
ego a meipso loquar.</cell>
<cell>17. If any man will do the
will of him: he shall know of
the doctrine, whether it be of
God, or whether I speak of
myself.</cell></row>
<row><cell>18. Qui a semetipso loquitur,
gloriam propriam quaerit: qui
autem quaerit gloriam eius qui
misit eum, hic verax est, et
iniustitia in illo non est.</cell>
<cell>18. He that speaketh of
himself, seeketh his own
glory: but he that seeketh the
glory of him that sent him, he
is true, and there is no
injustice in him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17, 18. In proof that His
doctrine is from God, He
appeals to two arguments:&mdash;(1)
If they will only follow the
will of God, and believe, <emph>experience</emph>
will teach them that
His doctrine is divine. (2) The
fact that He seeks not His own
glory, but the glory of the
Father, is a proof that His
doctrine is the doctrine of the
Father, and, therefore a proof
that He is veracious, and does
not deceive (<emph>injustitia</emph> in illo non
est). This second argument,
as Mald. points out, is based
upon what does, not upon what
should, happen among men.
When men preach doctrines
of their own invention, they
generally seek their own
glory.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Nonne Moyses dedit
vobis legem: et nemo ex
vobis facit legem?</cell>
<cell>19. Did not Moses give you
the law, and <hi rend='italic'>yet</hi> none of you
keepeth the law?</cell></row>
<row><cell>20. Quid me quaeritis interficere?
Respondit turba, et
dixit: Daemonium habes:
quis te quaerit interficere?</cell>
<cell>20. Why seek you to kill
me? The multitude answered
and said: Thou hast a devil;
who seeketh to kill thee?</cell></row></table>

<p>
19, 20. Most probably Christ
begins here to defend Himself
against the charge of violating
the Sabbath, which the Jews
had brought against Him on a
former occasion (v. 16, 18),
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
and which they still remembered
against Him.
</p>

<p>
He uses an <q>argumentum
ad hominem</q>: You do not
keep the law yourselves, why
then seek to kill Me, even for
what you allege to be a
violation of it? Some among
the crowd were even then
anxious to kill Jesus, as His
words prove, and to these He
directs His words; but there
were many present who had
no such intention, and some of
these reply, <hi rend='bold'>Thou hast a devil</hi>.
They may have meant that He
was possessed, or simply that
He was raving, out of His
senses.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>21. Respondit Iesus, et dixit
eis: Unum opus feci, et
omnes miramini.</cell>
<cell>21. Jesus answered and
said to them: One work I
have done; and you all
wonder:</cell></row>
<row><cell>22. Propterea Moyses dedit
vobis circumcisionem: (non
quia ex Moyse est, sed ex
patribus) et in sabbato circumciditis
hominem.</cell>
<cell>22. Therefore Moses gave
you circumcision (not because
it is of Moses, but of the
fathers); and on the sabbath-day
you circumcise a man.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23. Si circumcisionem accipit
homo in sabbato, ut non
solvatur lex Moysi: mihi
indignamini quia totum hominem
sanum feci in sabbato?</cell>
<cell>23. If a man receive circumcision
on the sabbath-day,
that the law of Moses may
not be broken; are you angry
at me because I have healed
the whole man on the sabbath-day?</cell></row></table>

<p>
21-23. He proceeds to show
by sober reasoning, that they
ought not to blame Him for
having healed the man on the
Sabbath.
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='bold'>one work</hi> of verse
21 is the healing of the man
on the Sabbath day (v. 9,
16). Some prefer to connect
<q>propterea</q> with verse 21:
<q>and you all wonder on account
of it.</q> But it is better
to connect it, as in the
Vulgate, with what follows.
The sense is: it was on this
account Moses gave you circumcision;
namely, because
it had been handed down from
the Patriarchs (Gen. xvii. 10),
not because it was properly a
part of the law. If then a
man may receive circumcision
on the Sabbath, <emph>and yet</emph> the
law regarding the observance
of the Sabbath is not violated
thereby, are you angry with
Me because, doing the will of
God, I made a man whole,
both body and soul, on the
Sabbath? In this explanation,
<q>ut</q> (ἵνα) is ecbatic, denoting
a consequence. See Gen. xxii.
14; John <ref target='X_17'>x. 17</ref>; Apoc. xiii.
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
13. Others, however, give
the particle its ordinary telic
force, and explain thus: If
then a man may receive circumcision
on the Sabbath, <emph>in
order that</emph> the law commanding
circumcision to be performed on
the eighth day be not violated,
are you angry, &amp;c.? Both
explanations are probable, and
leave the argument unchanged.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Nolite iudicare secundum
faciem, sed iustum iudicium
iudicate.</cell>
<cell>24. Judge not according to
the appearance, but judge
just judgment.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. <hi rend='bold'>According to the
appearance</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, take no
account of persons, but judge
according to the merits of the
case.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Dicebant ergo quidam
ex Ierosolymis: Nonne hic est
quem quaerunt interficere?</cell>
<cell>25. Some therefore of Jerusalem
said: Is not this he
whom they seek to kill?</cell></row>
<row><cell>26. Et ecce palam loquitur,
et nihil ei dicunt. Numquid
vere cognoverunt principes
quia hic est Christus?</cell>
<cell>26. And behold he speaketh
openly, and they say nothing
to him. Have the rulers
known for a truth that this is
the Christ?</cell></row></table>

<p>
25, 26. Some of the people
of Jerusalem (the correct
reading is Ἱεροσολυμιτῶν) said:
can it be that they have discovered
that He is really
Christ?
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>27. Sed hunc scimus unde
sit: Christus autem cum
venerit, nemo scit unde scit.</cell>
<cell>27. But we know this man
whence he is: but when the
Christ cometh, no man
knoweth whence he is.</cell></row></table>

<p>
27. And yet this cannot be,
for we know this man whence
he is; but when the Christ
cometh no man knoweth
whence He is. This erroneous
opinion of theirs may have
arisen from Micheas, v. 2:
<q>His going forth is from the
beginning from the days of
eternity;</q> and Mal. iii. 2:
<q>And who shall be able to
think of the day of His
coming?</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>28. Clamabat ergo Iesus in
templo docens, et dicens: Et
me scitis, et unde sim scitis:
et a meipso non veni, sed est
verus qui misit me, quem vos
nescitis.</cell>
<cell>28. Jesus therefore cried
out in the temple, teaching
and saying: You both
know me, and you know
whence I am, and I am not
come of myself; but he that
sent me is true, whom you
know not.</cell></row></table>

<p>
28. The meaning is: You
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
know Me as man, and you
know My parents, and yet I
come not of My own authority,
but sent by My Father, who
therein shows Himself true to
His promises.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>29. Ego scio eum: quia ab
ipso sum, et ipse me misit.</cell>
<cell>29. I know him, because I
am from him, and he hath
sent me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
29. He declares His Divine
knowledge of the Father, His
eternal generation, and mission
in time.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>30. Quaerebant ergo eum
apprehendere: et nemo misit
in illum manus, quia nondum
venerat hora eius.</cell>
<cell>30. They sought therefore
to apprehend him: and no
man laid hands on him,
because his hour was not yet
come.</cell></row></table>

<p>
30. They rightly understand
Him to claim to be Divine,
and as a consequence seek to
apprehend Him; but the time
for His sufferings had not yet
arrived, and so they were
powerless.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>31. De turba autem multi
crediderunt in eum, et dicebant:
Christus cum venerit,
numquid plura signa faciet
quam quae hic facit?</cell>
<cell>31. But of the people many
believed in him, and said:
When the Christ cometh, shall
he do more miracles than these
which this man doth?</cell></row></table>

<p>
31. Many of the multitude&mdash;in
contrast with their leaders&mdash;believed
in Him. <hi rend='bold'>When the
Christ cometh, shall he</hi>, &amp;c.
The question, expecting, as it
does, a negative answer (numquid),
suggests that Jesus must
be the Christ.
</p>

<anchor id='VII_32'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>32. Audierunt pharisaei
turbam murmurantem de illo
haec: et miserunt principes et
pharisaei ministros, ut apprehenderent
eum.</cell>
<cell>32. The Pharisees heard the
people murmuring these things
concerning him: and the
rulers and Pharisees sent
ministers to apprehend him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
32. <hi rend='bold'>Rulers</hi>, rather chief
priests (ἀρχιερεῖς). The
<hi rend='bold'>ministers</hi> were officers attendant
upon the Sanhedrim, or
engaged about the temple.
See verses <ref target='VII_45'>45, 46</ref>; xiii. <ref target='XIII_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='XIII_18'>18</ref>, <ref target='XIII_22'>22</ref>;
<ref target='XIX_6'>xix. 6</ref>; Acts v. 22, 26. As
the Sanhedrim was made up of
chief priests, Pharisees, and
Scribes, probably it was the
Sanhedrim that sent these
ministers to apprehend Christ.
</p>

<anchor id='VII_33'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>33. Dixit ergo eis Iesus:
Adhuc modicum tempus vobiscum
sum: et vado ad eum qui
me misit.</cell>
<cell>33. Jesus therefore said to
them: Yet a little while I am
with you: and <hi rend='italic'>then</hi> I go to
him that sent me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
33. Omit <q>eis</q> (to them).
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
Christ's words were probably
directed not merely to the
ministers, but to all the people.
<hi rend='bold'>Yet a little while I am with
you</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, almost six months
more after this feast of Tabernacles,
and then He would go
to the Father.
</p>

<anchor id='VII_34'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>34. Quaeretis me, et non
invenietis: et ubi ego sum vos
non potestis venire.</cell>
<cell>34. You shall seek me, and
shall not find me: and where
I am, <hi rend='italic'>thither</hi> you cannot come.</cell></row></table>

<p>
34. <hi rend='bold'>You shall seek me, and
shall not find me.</hi> Some
think these words were fulfilled
at the siege of Jerusalem, when
many of the Jews must have
looked in vain for help from
Him whom they had put to
death.
</p>

<p>
Others, like Maldonatus,
say the statement is conditional:
even if you sought me,
you should not find me, after a
little while.
</p>

<p>
Since the same words:
<q>You shall seek me,</q> were
afterwards addressed to the
Apostles (xiii. 33), it is not
likely that the reference is to
seeking Him at the destruction
of Jerusalem, for the Apostles
did not seek Him then. It
would also seem from xiii. 33
that the view of Maldonatus
just stated is not probable, for
in xiii. 33 there is not a conditional
statement, but simply
a prediction that the Apostles
would seek Him. Hence we
take it that in the text before
us also, there is a prediction
that the Jews after His departure
would, when in distress
and tribulation, desire to see
Him once more among them.
Doubtless, many Jews afterwards
had such a desire, but it
was in vain, for He had gone
to Him that sent Him.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And where I am</hi> (= shall
be) <hi rend='bold'>thither you cannot come</hi>.
</p>

<p>
These words too were afterwards
addressed to the Apostles
(xiii. 33), and we believe in the
same sense as here. The meaning
is that until death at least
the separation would be complete,
for He would be no longer
here, and where He would be
they could not join Him. Some
take the words: <q>You cannot
come,</q> as meaning here that
the Jews on account of their
sins could <emph>never</emph> enter heaven.
But since, as we have said, the
same words were afterwards
addressed to the Apostles, the
view we have adopted seems
more probable.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>35. Dixerunt ergo Iudaei ad
semetipsos: Quo hic iturus
est, quia non inveniemus eum?
numquid in dispersionem gentium
iturus est, et docturus
gentes?</cell>
<cell>35. The Jews therefore said,
among themselves: Whither
will he go, that we shall not
find him? will he go unto the
dispersed among the gentiles,
and teach the gentiles?</cell></row></table>

<p>
35. <hi rend='bold'>The dispersed among
the Gentiles</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the Jews
scattered among the Gentiles,
or more probably the Gentiles
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
themselves (Ἑλλήνων, not Ἑλληνιστῶν)
scattered over the world.
The concluding words of the
verse: <q>and teach the Gentiles</q>
render the latter view
the more probable.
</p>

<anchor id='VII_36'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>36. Quis est hic sermo,
quem dixit: Quaeretis me, et
non invenietis: et ubi sum
ego, vos non potestis venire?</cell>
<cell>36. What is this saying
that he hath said: You shall
seek me, and shall not find
me; and where I am, you
cannot come?</cell></row>
<row><cell>37. In novissimo autem die
magno festivitatis, stabat
Iesus, et clamabat, dicens: Si
quis sitit, veniat ad me, et
bibat.</cell>
<cell>37. And on the last <hi rend='italic'>and</hi>
great day of the festivity,
Jesus stood and cried, saying:
If any man thirst, let him
come to me, and drink.</cell></row>
<row><cell>38. Qui credit in me, sicut
dicit scriptura, flumina de
ventre eius fluent aquae vivae.</cell>
<cell>38. He that believeth in me,
as the scripture saith, <hi rend='italic'>Out of
his belly shall flow rivers of
living water</hi>.</cell></row></table>

<p>
37, 38. On the last day, the
great day of the feast, that is, the
eighth day, Jesus cried aloud to
the people assembled at the
temple. His words mean: If
anyone thirst spiritually, let him
come to Me by faith, and grace
shall be abundantly poured into
his soul. The words: <hi rend='bold'>Out of
his belly</hi>, &amp;c., are nowhere
to be found in the Old Testament;
but, as signifying the
abundance of grace in the new
dispensation, they convey the
sense of many passages of the
Old Testament. See Is. xli.
18, xliv. 3.; Ezech. xxxvi. 25;
Joel ii. 28.
</p>

<anchor id='VII_39'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>39. Hoc autem dixit de
Spiritu, quem accepturi erant
credentes in eum: nondum
enim erat Spiritus datus, quia
Iesus nondum erat glorificatus.</cell>
<cell>39. Now this he said of the
Spirit which they should receive
who believed in him: for as
yet the Spirit was not given,
because Jesus was not yet
glorified.</cell></row></table>

<p>
39. The Evangelist gives an
authentic interpretation of our
Lord's words: <hi rend='bold'>For as yet
the Spirit was not given</hi>.
These words explain why our
Lord spoke of the abundant
outpouring of the Spirit as
<emph>still to come</emph>, for the Holy Ghost
was not yet given, inasmuch as
Christ was not yet glorified (xvi.
7). When it is said that the
Holy Ghost was not yet given,
the meaning is, that He was
not yet given so <emph>abundantly</emph>, so
<emph>manifestly</emph>, or so <emph>universally</emph>,
as He has been since the first
Pentecost. It is not meant
that the Holy Ghost had not
been given to the just of the
Old Testament. They, as well
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
as we, had the grace of the
Holy Ghost in their souls;
moreover, according to the
common teaching of the fathers
and theologians, they, like the
just now, had the Holy Ghost
united to their souls, not merely
by His grace, but also by a
substantial union. This union
is not, however, peculiar
to the Holy Ghost, but is
common to the Three Divine
Persons, by reason of their
unity of nature, and is only by
appropriation attributed to the
Holy Ghost. See Franz., <hi rend='italic'>De
Trin., last Disp.</hi>; Corl., pp. 198,
199.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>40. Ex illa ergo turba cum
audissent hos sermones eius,
dicebant: Hic est vere propheta.</cell>
<cell>40. Of that multitude therefore,
when they had heard
these words of his, some said:
This is the prophet indeed.</cell></row>
<row><cell>41. Alii dicebant: Hic est
Christus. Quidam autem
dicebant: Numquid a Galilaea
venit Christus?</cell>
<cell>41. Others said: This is the
Christ. But some said: Doth
the Christ come out of Galilee?</cell></row>
<row><cell>42. Nonne scriptura dicit:
Quia ex semine David, et de
Bethlehem castello, ubi erat
David, venit Christus?</cell>
<cell>42. Doth not the scripture
say: That Christ cometh out
of the seed of David, and from
Bethlehem the town where
David was?</cell></row>
<row><cell>43. Dissensio itaqua facta
est in turba propter eum.</cell>
<cell>43. So there arose a dissension
among the people because
of him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>44. Quidam autem ex ipsis
volebant apprehendere eum:
sed nemo misit super eum
manus.</cell>
<cell>44. And some of them
would have apprehended him:
but no man laid hands upon
him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
40-44. The Evangelist notes
the difference of opinion among
the crowd. Some believed
Him to be <emph>the Prophet</emph> promised
to Moses (Deut. xviii. 18);
others (wrongly distinguishing
between the Prophet and the
Messias) held Him to be the
Messias; others doubted (verse
41); others remained wholly
incredulous (verse 44). In verse
42, three different passages of
Sacred Scripture are combined:
<q>of the seed of David</q> (Is. xi.
1); <q>from Bethlehem</q> (Mich.
v. 2); <q>the town where David
was</q> (1 Kings xvii. 12).
</p>

<anchor id='VII_45'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>45. Venerunt ergo ministri
ad pontifices et pharisaeos.
Et dixerunt eis illi: Quare non
adduxistis illum?</cell>
<cell>45. The ministers therefore
came to the chief priests and
the Pharisees. And they said
to them: Why have you not
brought him?</cell></row>
<row><cell>46. Responderunt ministri:
Numquam sic locutus est
homo, sicut hic homo.</cell>
<cell>46. The ministers answered:
Never did man speak like this
man.</cell></row>
<row><cell>47. Responderunt ergo eis
pharisaei; numquid et vos
seducti estis?</cell>
<cell>47. The Pharisees therefore
answered them: Are you also
seduced?</cell></row>
<row><cell>48. Numquid ex principibus
aliquis credidit in eum, aut ex
pharisaeis?</cell>
<cell>48. Hath any one of the
rulers believed in him, or of
the Pharisees?</cell></row>
<row><cell>49. Sed turba haec, quae
non novit legem maledicti sunt.</cell>
<cell>49. But this multitude that
knoweth not the law, are
accursed.</cell></row></table>

<p>
45-49. The officers, who had
been sent a few days before to
apprehend Christ (see above, <ref target='VII_14'>14</ref>,
<ref target='VII_32'>32</ref>), or perhaps other officers, return
and bear favourable testimony
to Him, for which they
are rebuked by the Pharisees.
</p>

<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>

<anchor id='VII_50'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>50. Dixit Nicodemus ad eos,
ille qui venit ad eum nocte,
qui unus erat ex ipsis.</cell>
<cell>50. Nicodemus said to them,
he that came to him by night,
who was one of them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>51. Numquid lex nostra
iudicat hominem nisi prius
audierit ab ipso, et cognoverit
quid faciat?</cell>
<cell>51. Doth our law judge any
man, unless it first hear him,
and know what he doth?</cell></row>
<row><cell>52. Responderunt, et dixerunt
ei: Numquid et tu
Galilaeus es? Scrutare scripturas,
et vide quia a Galilaea
propheta non surgit.</cell>
<cell>52. They answered and said
to him: Art thou also a Galilean?
Search the scriptures,
and see that out of Galilee a
prophet riseth not.</cell></row></table>

<p>
50-52. Nicodemus (iii. 1, 2)
interposes in Christ's favour;
to whom the members of the
Sanhedrim impatiently reply
that no prophet had ever arisen
in Galilee, thus disposing, as
they thought, of Christ's claim
to be a prophet. But they
were wrong in their assumption
that Christ had been
born in Galilee (see Luke ii.
4-7), and equally wrong in
the conclusion they drew that,
being a Galilean, He could not
be a prophet. For the Sacred
Scriptures had nowhere said
that a prophet could not arise
in Galilee; nay, they prove
that the prophet Jonas was a
Galilean, 4 Kings, xiv. 25.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>53. Et reversi sunt unusquisque
in domum suam.</cell>
<cell>53. And every man returned
to his own house.</cell></row></table>

<p>
53. See next chapter.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-2. <hi rend='bold'>Christ having spent the night on the Mount of Olives, returns
in the morning to the temple and teaches.</hi>
</p>

<p>
3-11. <hi rend='bold'>The story of the woman taken in adultery.</hi>
</p>

<p>
12-20. <hi rend='bold'>Discourse of Christ with the Pharisees in the treasury.</hi>
</p>

<p>
21-29. <hi rend='bold'>He upbraids them for their incredulity, and foretells His own
crucifixion.</hi>
</p>

<p>
30-50. <hi rend='bold'>Many believed in Him, but others remained incredulous (33), and
to these He says that they are not the children of Abraham,
but of the devil.</hi>
</p>

<p>
51-59. <hi rend='bold'>Challenged by the Jews, He declares Himself greater than
Abraham; and when they were about to stone Him for this
declaration, He hides Himself.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Authenticity of John vii. 53-viii. 11.</head>

<p>
This is the second of the
three passages in our Gospel,
whose authenticity has been
seriously questioned. See
<ref target='Intro_VI'>Introd. VI</ref>. We shall sum up
the evidence by which the
critical question must be
decided, and then say what
we think as to the genuineness
of the passage.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Evidence against Authenticity.</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Manuscripts.</hi>&mdash;The passage
is wanting in the four
oldest Greek MSS. that we
possess, viz., in B, א, A, C;
the two former of which are
thought by critics to belong
to the fourth, and the
two latter, to the fifth century;
also in four other <emph>uncial</emph> MSS.,
in more than sixty <emph>cursives</emph>,
and in thirty-three Evangelistaries.<note place='foot'>Evangelistaries are selections from the Gospels for the purpose of
liturgical reading.</note>
In about fifty
other MSS., though read, it is
marked as doubtful.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Versions.</hi>&mdash;It is wanting
in the best MSS. of the <q>Vetus
Itala;</q> in the <q>Simple</q> and
<q>Figured</q> Syriac; in most
MSS. of the Coptic; in all of
Gothic, and in some of the
Armenian.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Fathers.</hi>&mdash;The passage is
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
not commented upon by any
of the Greek fathers that
wrote upon this Gospel.
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>Internal evidence</hi> is said
to prove the passage spurious,
because of the use of many
words and phrases not elsewhere
used by St. John.<note place='foot'><q>Relate ad stylum haec praesertim notantur; pro particala οὖν quam
amat Joannes, semper adhibetur δέ; deinde occurunt vocabula (vel phrases),
quibus Joannes nullibi utitur: ὄρθρον, πᾶς ὁ λαός, καθίσας ἐδίδασκεν αὐτούς, οἱ
γραμματεῖς καὶ οἱ φαρισαίοι, ἐπιμενεῖν, ἀναμάρτητος, καταλείπεσθαι, κατακρίνειν,
et πλήν.</q>&mdash;Corn., Introd., iii., p. 235, n. 3.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Evidence in favour of Authenticity.</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Manuscripts.</hi>&mdash;The passage
is found in seven <emph>uncial</emph>
MSS. (one of which, D, though
itself only of the sixth century,
is thought to represent the
text of the Gospels as it stood
in the second century); in
more than three hundred cursives,
and in six Evangelistaries.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Versions.</hi>&mdash;The passage
is found in the Latin Vulgate,
in the Arabic, Persian, Ethiopic,
Syriac of Jerusalem, Slavic,
and Anglo-Saxon.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Fathers.</hi>&mdash;<emph>The passage</emph> is
read by nearly all the Latin
fathers&mdash;Ambrose, Augustine,
Jerome, Leo the Great, Chrysologus,
Sedulius, Cassiodorus,
&amp;c.; and in the <hi rend='italic'>Apostolic
Constitutions</hi>, a work of the
third, or, at the latest, the
fourth century.
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>Internal Evidence</hi>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>)
Christ's merciful treatment of
the adulteress harmonizes
beautifully with His declaration
immediately after (viii. 15),
that at His first coming He
condemned no man. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) It is
inconceivable how a passage
<emph>of this nature</emph> could ever have
found its way into so many
MSS., unless it was written
by St. John. On the other
hand, it is easy to see how,
though genuine, it came to be
omitted in many MSS., through
the fear that Christ's merciful
treatment of the adulteress
might encourage sinners.
This is exactly what St. Augustine
says:&mdash;<q>Nonnulli modicae
fidei, vel potius inimici verae
fidei, credo metuentes peccandi
impunitatem dari mulieribus
suis, illud quod de adulterae
indulgentia Dominus fecit,
abstulerunt de codicibus suis,
quasi permissionem peccandi
tribuerit qui dixit: <q>Jam
deinceps noli peccare</q></q> (St.
Aug., <hi rend='italic'>De Conj. Adult.</hi>, 2, 7).
</p>

<p>
As regards the arguments
<emph>against</emph> the passage, we believe
that the reason given by
St. Augustine in the words
just quoted, explains the
absence of the passage in so
many MSS., versions, and
fathers. As to the internal
arguments against the passage,
it must be admitted that a
number of words are used here
which are not met with elsewhere
in the writings of
St. John; but then the subject
is peculiar, and besides in
many other passages which
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
are unquestioned, we meet
with several words not used
elsewhere by the Evangelist.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, ix. 21-28, ἡλικίαν ἕχειν; συντίθεσθαι; λοιδορείν.</note>
Even Renan admits that there
is nothing in the passage that
is at variance with the style of
the fourth Gospel.<note place='foot'><q>Rien dans le morceau ne fait disparate avec le style du quatrième
Evangile.</q>&mdash;Renan, <hi rend='italic'>Vie de Jesus</hi>, ed. 18, page 500.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Conclusion.</head>

<p>
From the evidence, which
has been impartially laid before
the reader, we hold we are
justified in concluding that
even on mere critical grounds
the passage is more probably
genuine. Some, as Franzelin
(<hi rend='italic'>De Sacra. Script.</hi>, Thes. xix.,
pp. 466, 467), go farther, and
hold, that since the decree of
the Council of Trent (Sess. iv.),
which defined all the sacred
books of the Bible, and <emph>all their
parts</emph>, as found in the Latin
Vulgate, to be canonical, it is
not lawful for any Catholic to
question the authenticity of
this passage. They argue that
this passage constitutes a <emph>part</emph>
(not merely a <q>particula</q>) of
the Gospel of St. John, and is,
therefore, covered by the
decree of Trent. Nor can
it be said in reply that
the Council, in the words
<q>cum omnibus suis partibus,</q>
meant to define the
authenticity of the Deuterocanonical
fragments of the
<emph>Old</emph> Testament only, for the
Acts<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Theiner</hi>, i., pp. 71-77.</note> of the Council show
that these words were intended
to refer especially to the
fragments of the Gospels.
</p>

<p>
To conclude, then, we hold
that we are not only critically
justified in accepting John vii.
53-viii. 11, as authentic, but
that it is extremely probable
that as Catholics we are <emph>bound</emph>
to accept it.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Text.</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Iesus autem perrexit in
montem Oliveti:</cell>
<cell>1. And Jesus went unto
mount Olivet.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. In contrast to those who
retired to their homes (vii. 53),
Jesus retired to Mount Olivet,
where He often spent the
night in prayer (Luke xxi.
37; vi. 12). Mount Olivet,
separated from Jerusalem
by the brook of Cedron,
was a Sabbath day's journey
from the City (Acts i. 12);
that is to say, about seven
and a-half stadia, and therefore
less than an English mile.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. Et diluculo iterum venit in
templum, et omnis populus
venit ad eum, et sedens
docebat eos.</cell>
<cell>2. And early in the morning
he came again into the temple,
and all the people came to
him, and sitting down he
taught them.</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. Early on the morning
that followed the eight days
of the Feast of Tabernacles
(see <ref target='VII_36'>vii. 37</ref>), He came again
to the temple, and all the
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
people who were assembled in
the City from the various parts
of Palestine, came to Him,
and He was teaching them.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Adducunt autem scribae
et pharisaei mulierem in adulterio
deprehensam: et statuerunt
eam in medio.</cell>
<cell>3. And the scribes and
Pharisees bring unto him a
woman taken in adultery;
and they set her in the midst,</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. While Jesus was engaged
in teaching the people, the
Pharisees bring to him a
woman who had been caught
in adultery, <hi rend='bold'>in the very act</hi>,
as we learn from the Greek of
verse 4.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Et dixerunt ei: Magister,
haec mulier modo deprehensa
est in adulterio.</cell>
<cell>4. And said to him: Master,
this woman was even now
taken in adultery.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. In lege autem Moyses
mandavit nobis huiusmodi
lapidare. Tu ergo quid dicis?</cell>
<cell>5. Now Moses in the law
commanded us to stone such
a one. But what sayest thou?</cell></row></table>

<p>
5. It is not stated anywhere
in the Pentateuch that the
adulterer and adulteress should
be <emph>stoned</emph>, but it is, that they
should be put to death (Lev.
xx. 10). Doubtless the death
was by stoning, as is indicated
in Ezech. xvi. 38-40.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Hoc autem dicebant
tentantes eum, ut possent
accusare eum. Iesus autem
inclinans se deorsum, digito
scribebat in terra.</cell>
<cell>6. And this they said,
tempting him, that they might
accuse him. But Jesus bowing
himself down, wrote with his
finger on the ground.</cell></row></table>

<p>
6. They hoped to entrap
our Lord; for if he acquitted
the woman they could charge
him with being an adversary
of the Mosaic Law (Lev. xx.
10); while if He condemned
her to death, they could
charge Him with defying
the Roman Law, which at
this time denied to the Jews
the right of inflicting capital
punishment (John xviii. 31).
What Jesus wrote it is impossible
to say. Probably it
was His intention to signify
by this turning away to something
else that He wished not
to have anything to do with
the matter in question.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Cum ergo perseverarent
interrogantes eum, erexit se,
et dixit eis: Qui sine peccato
est vestrum, primus in illam
lapidem mittat.</cell>
<cell>7. When therefore they
continued asking him, he
lifted up himself and said to
them: He that is without sin
among you, let him first cast
a stone at her.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. <hi rend='bold'>Let him first cast a
stone at her.</hi> The deep
wisdom of this answer gave
them no ground for charging
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
Him with opposition to any
law, and at the same time
referred them to their own
guilty consciences. He does
not say that sinners may not
be punished by sinners, but
implies that it was not seemly
that they who were guilty
of the same or greater sins
should be the accusers of the
poor wretch who stood before
them.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>8. Et iterum se inclinans,
scribebat in terra.</cell>
<cell>8. And again stooping down,
he wrote on the ground.</cell></row></table>

<p>
8. Having shamed them by
this appeal to the tribunal of
their conscience, He again
stooped down to write, probably
to afford them an
opportunity to depart.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>9. Audientes autem unus
post unum exibant, incipientes
a senioribus: et remansit solus
Iesus, et mulier in medio
stans.</cell>
<cell>9. But they hearing <hi rend='italic'>this</hi>
went out one by one, beginning
at the eldest. And Jesus
alone remained, and the
woman standing in the midst.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Erigens autem se Iesus,
dixit ei: Mulier, ubi sunt qui
te accusabant? nemo te condemnavit?</cell>
<cell>10. Then Jesus lifting up
himself, said to her: Woman,
where are they that accused
thee? Hath no man condemned
thee?</cell></row>
<row><cell>11. Quae dixit: Nemo,
Domine. Dixit autem Iesus:
Nec ego te condemnabo: vade,
et iam amplius noli peccare.</cell>
<cell>11. Who said: No man,
Lord. And Jesus said:
Neither will I condemn thee.
Go, and now sin no more.</cell></row></table>

<p>
11. <hi rend='bold'>Neither will I condemn
thee. Go, and now sin no
more.</hi> Doubtless the treatment
of her accusers by Christ,
and abundant grace poured
into her soul, had already
moved the woman's heart to
repentance, and Christ, exercising
His Divine power,
absolved her from her sin.
He did not condemn her, but,
in telling her to sin no more,
He showed that she had done
what was wrong, and warned
her as to the future. Thus the
incident shows the boundless
mercy of Christ for sinners,
His hatred of sin, and, what
St. John probably had chiefly
before his mind in recording
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
it, Christ's Divine power to
forgive sin.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Iterum ergo locutus est
eis Iesus, dicens. Ego sum
lux mundi: qui sequitur me
non ambulat in tenebris, sed
habebit lumen vitae.</cell>
<cell>12. Again therefore Jesus
spoke to them, saying: I am
the light of the world: he that
followeth me, walketh not in
darkness, but shall have the
light of life.</cell></row></table>

<p>
12. We do not know whether
this is a new discourse, or
only a continuation of that referred
to above in verse 2. On
Christ's words here recorded,
see above on <ref target='I_5'>i. 5</ref>. They follow
Christ, who believe in Him,
and obey Him.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>13. Dixerunt ergo ei pharisaei:
Tu de teipso testimonium
perhibes: testimonium
tuum non est verum.</cell>
<cell>13. The Pharisees therefore
said to him: Thou givest
testimony of thyself: thy
testimony is not true.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. <hi rend='bold'>Thy testimony is not
true</hi>; that is to say, is not
juridical, such as ought to be
accepted.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Respondit Iesus, et dixit
eis: Et si ego testimonium
perhibeo de meipso, verum est
testimonium meum: quia scio
unde veni, et quo vado: vos
autem nescitis unde venio,
aut quo vado.</cell>
<cell>14. Jesus answered, and
said to them: Although I give
testimony of myself, my testimony
is true: For I know
whence I came, and whither I
go: but you know not whence
I come, or whither I go.</cell></row></table>

<p>
14. Christ's answer is:
though I bear testimony of
Myself, My testimony should
be accepted, because I am
God (I know whence I came,
and whither I go); self-interest
and self-love can have no
influence on Me, so as to warp
My judgment or weaken My
testimony.
</p>

<anchor id='VIII_15'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>15. Vos secundum carnem
iudicatis: ego non iudico
quemquam:</cell>
<cell>15. You judge according to
the flesh: I judge not any
man.</cell></row></table>

<p>
15. <hi rend='bold'>You judge according
to the flesh</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, according
to appearances, as though I
were a mere man; or, more
probably, according to your
carnal ideas (Rom. viii. 4-6);
thinking Me an impostor, you
condemn Me. <hi rend='bold'>I judge not any
man.</hi> The sense is that
Christ at His first coming,
condemned no one, for it is
of the judgment of condemnation
there is question, according
to what seems the
most probable view. Compare
iii. 17; xii. 47.
</p>

<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Et si iudico ego, iudicium
meum verum est, quia solus
non sum: sed ego, et qui
misit me, Pater.</cell>
<cell>16. And if I do judge, my
judgment is true: because
I am not alone, but I and the
Father that sent me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. The meaning is: if I
did judge, My judgment would
be just, because not the judgment
of a mere man, but
identical with the judgment
of My Father. See <ref target='X_29'>x. 30</ref>;
<ref target='XIV_10'>xiv. 10</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Et in lege vestra scriptum
est, quia duorum hominum
testimonium verum est.</cell>
<cell>17. And in your law it is
written, that the testimony of
two men is true.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17. Καὶ ... δὲ, indicate the
transition in which He passes
from speaking of condemnation
to speak of His testimony.
Your law, He says, requires
and is satisfied with two
Witnesses (Deut. xvii. 6).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Ego sum qui testimonium
perhibeo de meipso: et
testimonium perhibet de me,
qui misit me, Pater.</cell>
<cell>18. I am one that give testimony
of myself: and the
Father that sent me, giveth
testimony of me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. Now, two bear testimony
to Me. Two <emph>Persons</emph> bore
testimony that the man Christ,
who spoke to the Jews, was
God. The Son Himself, as
God bore this testimony by
word and work, and the
Father by the miracles that
He gave the Son to perform
(v. 36).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Dicebant ergo ei: Ubi
est Pater tuus? Respondit
Iesus: Neque me scitis, neque
Patrem meum: si me sciretis
forsitan et Patrem meum sciretis.</cell>
<cell>19. They said therefore to
him: Where is thy Father?
Jesus answered: Neither me
do you know, nor my Father:
if you did know me, perhaps
you would know my Father also.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. To their question Jesus
answers: <hi rend='bold'>Neither me do you
know, nor my Father</hi>. The
sense is: You know not who
I am, <emph>that I am God</emph>; if you
knew and recognised Me to be
God, you would also know
who My Father is, that He
must be God; and thus you
would know the answer to
your question, since God
dwells in heaven. On the
use of <q>forsitan,</q> see above
on <ref target='IV_10'>iv. 10</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Haec verba locutus est
Iesus in gazophylacio, docens
in templo: et nemo apprehendit
eum, quia necdum venerat
hora eius.</cell>
<cell>20. These words Jesus
spoke in the treasury, teaching
in the temple: and no man
laid hands on him, because
his hour was not yet come.</cell></row></table>

<p>
20. The Greek word translated
by <q>treasury</q> is γαζοφυλακίῳ,
derived from the Persian
<foreign rend='italic'>gaza</foreign> (money), and φυλάσσω (to
guard). This treasury was
a chest or safe for holding
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
money (see Luke xxi. 1), but
by metonymy the name was
given to the cloister in which
it stood. This cloister was in
the court of the women. See
above on <ref target='II_14'>ii. 14</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>21. Dixit ergo iterum eis
Iesus: Ego vado, et quaeretis
me, et in peccato vestro moriemini.
Quo ego vado, vos non
potestis venire?</cell>
<cell>21. Again therefore Jesus
said to them: I go, and you
shall seek me, and you shall
die in your sin. Whither I go,
you cannot come.</cell></row></table>

<p>
21. It is doubtful whether
this is a continuation of the
preceding, or a new discourse.
For the meaning of the verse,
see above on <ref target='VII_34'>vii. 34</ref>. The
particular <emph>sin</emph> referred to here
is infidelity; but dying in
infidelity, meant dying in
many sins besides; and hence
the plural <emph>sins</emph>, is used in
verse 24.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Dicebant ergo Iudaei:
Numquid interficiet semetipsum,
quia dixit: Quo ego
vado, vos non potestis venire?</cell>
<cell>22. The Jews therefore said:
Will he kill himself, because
he said: Whither I go, you
cannot come?</cell></row></table>

<p>
22. Josephus (<hi rend='italic'>De Bello Jud.</hi>,
iii. 8, 5) tells us that the
Pharisees believed that the
lowest depths of hell are
reserved for suicides. The
words of this verse may refer
to that superstition; as if
they said: does He mean to
go into the depths of hell,
where we the children of
Abraham cannot, of course,
follow Him? But the more
simple explanation is: He
cannot escape from us wherever
He may go on this earth.
Does He then mean to take
His own life, that so He may
be out of our reach?
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Et dicebat eis: Vos de
deorsum estis, ego de supernis
sum. Vos de mundo hoc estis,
ego non sum de hoc mundo.</cell>
<cell>23. And he said to them:
You are from beneath, I am
from above. You are of this
world, I am not of this world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
23. Taking no notice of
what had just been said, Jesus
proceeds in His discourse.
<hi rend='bold'>You</hi>, He says, <hi rend='bold'>are from
beneath, I am from above</hi>
(see <ref target='III_31'>iii. 31</ref>); <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, you are
earthly in origin and nature, I
am of heaven; moreover, you
are earthly in sentiment, you
belong to the <emph>wicked</emph> world
(see <ref target='XV_19'>xv. 19</ref>), I do not belong
to it. Thus He shows them
there is a twofold difference
between Him and them; and
unless by the supernatural
principle of faith they are
lifted above their nature, and
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
taken out of the wicked world,
they shall die in their sins, and
shall never here or hereafter
be able to follow whither He
goeth. Instead of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>peccato</foreign>
(Vulg.) in the end of verse 24,
read <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>peccatis</foreign>. <hi rend='bold'>For if you believe
not that I am he.</hi> <q>He</q>
is not represented in the Greek
or Latin text, and ought not to
stand in the English. The predicate
may be purposely suppressed
in order to leave the
meaning, which was still
sufficiently intelligible, obscure,
and thus afford no opportunity
to His enemies of charging
Him with blasphemy.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Dixi ergo vobis quia
moriemini in peccatis vestris:
si enim non credideritis quia
ego sum, moriemini in peccato
vestro.</cell>
<cell>24. Therefore I said to you,
that you shall die in your sins.
For if you believe not that I
am he, you shall die in your
sin.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25. Dicebant ergo ei: Tu
quis es? Dixit eis Iesus:
Principium, qui et loquor vobis.</cell>
<cell>25. They said therefore to
him: Who art thou? Jesus
said to them: The beginning,
who also speak unto you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
25. This is a very obscure
verse. Christ had just spoken
of faith in Himself; but in
Himself <emph>under what aspect</emph> He
had not defined; and now in
the hope of evoking an answer
for which they could punish
Him, they ask: <hi rend='bold'>Who art
thou?</hi> His answer is purposely
obscure. It is according to
the Greek text, τὴν ἀρχὴν ὅτι
(or ὅ τι) καὶ λαλῶ ὑμῖν; which
is rendered in the Vulgate:
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Principium qui et loquor vobis</foreign>,
and in our Rheims version:
<hi rend='bold'>The beginning, who also
speak unto you</hi>.
</p>

<p>
About the meaning of this
answer there is a great diversity
opinion. Some take the
words affirmatively, others
interrogatively; some understand
τὴν ἀρχήν as a substantive,
others as an adverb;
some regard ὅ τι as a relative
(that which), others as an
interrogative = τί (how or
why?) and others again as a
conjunction, ὅτι (for, or,
because). The Vulgate translator
may have read ὅστις
(who) instead of ὅ τι, or ὅτι;
or possibly <q>Qui et</q> of our
Vulgate is a corruption of
<q>quia,</q> which is found in the
oldest Vulgate MSS. The
objection against the Vulgate
and English translations is
that while τῆν ἀρχήν is an
accusative, they <emph>seem</emph> to understand
it as a nominative. Nor
can it be replied, that it is
attracted into the accusative
case of the relative which
follows; for, apart from the
fact that there is no other
instance of such attraction in
St. John, the explanation is
inadmissible here, inasmuch
as these translations understand
the relative not as an
accusative, but as a nominative.
A better defence is that
of St. Augustine, who would
supply some such words as:
<q>Believe Me to be,</q> before
the sentence, thus making
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>principium</foreign> the accusative after
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>esse</foreign>: Believe Me to be the
beginning, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
(2) Others, understanding
τὴν ἀρχήν in the same way
as the preceding opinion, take
ὁ τι as a relative, and render:
I am the beginning, that which
I also declare unto you.
Here there is room for attraction,
since the relative is now
taken as an accusative; but
against such attraction is the
usage of St. John, as already
stated.
</p>

<p>
(3) Others, taking τὴν ἀρχήν
as an adverb (from the beginning),
render: I am from the
beginning, from eternity, what
I even declare unto you. But it
is objected to this view that τὴν
ἀρχήν is not found elsewhere in
Sacred Scripture in this sense,
and moreover that the verb
λαλῶ (to discuss with, to converse)
is wrongly taken to be
equivalent to λέγω (to declare).
To this latter point, however,
it is replied that the two verbs
are frequently interchanged in
later Greek.
</p>

<p>
(4) Others thus: Even that
which I have also spoken to
you from the beginning.<note place='foot'>So the Protestant Revised Version, which in the margin gives as an
alternative: How is it that I even speak to you at all?</note>
But this view is open to the
same objections as the preceding.
</p>

<p>
(5) Others again: Essentially
(or, in very deed) that which I
speak unto you. So Alford.
</p>

<p>
(6) Others: On the whole,
why do I even speak with you?
So St. Chrys., Corluy, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
(7) Others: Absolutely, or
most certainly, that which I
also tell you. So Beel., Kuin,
&amp;c. Τὴν ἀρχήν is thus taken as
equivalent to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>omnino</foreign>, for which
sense Beelen quotes several
classical writers.
</p>

<p>
We prefer the sixth and
seventh opinions; but rather
the seventh, since it supposes
Christ to answer their question,
though in language purposely
obscure. In the sixth opinion,
Christ vouchsafes no answer
to their question, and we
should naturally expect an
impatient interruption from
them immediately after, were
that opinion correct.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>26. Multa habeo de vobis
loqui, et iudicare: sed qui me
misit, verax est: et ego quae
audivi ab eo, haec loquor in
mundo.</cell>
<cell>26. Many things I have to
speak and to judge of you.
But he that sent me is true;
and the things I have heard of
him, these same I speak in the
world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
26. Some explain thus: I
have many things to say of
you, and to condemn in you,
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
<emph>but with this only will I charge
you now</emph>, namely, that you are
guilty of incredulity, since He
who sent Me is true (truthful),
and I speak His words, and
yet you refuse to believe in
Me. But the ellipsis here is
not sufficiently obvious; and,
hence, we prefer to understand
thus: I have many things, &amp;c.,
but My judgments will be just,
and such as cannot be gainsaid.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>27. Et non cognoverunt quia
Patrem eius dicebat Deum.</cell>
<cell>27. And they understood
not that he called God his
father.</cell></row></table>

<p>
27. The Greek is: <hi rend='italic'>They
knew not that He spoke to them
of the Father</hi>.
</p>

<anchor id='VIII_28'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>28. Dixit ergo eis Iesus:
Cum exaltaveritis Filium
hominis, tunc cognoscetis quia
ego sum, et a meipso facio
nihil, sed sicut docuit me Pater,
haec loquor:</cell>
<cell>28. Jesus therefore said to
them: When you shall have
lifted up the son of man, then
shall you know that I am he,
and that I do nothing of
myself, but as the Father hath
taught me, these things I
speak.</cell></row></table>

<p>
28. <hi rend='bold'>Lifted up.</hi> The reference
is to Christ's crucifixion as is
clear from xii. 32, 33. The
substance of Christ's prediction
is, that after His death they
will come to recognise Him as
God. We know how truly
this prediction was fulfilled,
not merely in the centurion
and his soldiers (Matt. xxvii.
54), and in the crowd that
returned from Calvary, striking
their breasts (Luke xxiii. 48),
but all along from that time
through the preaching of the
Apostles. On the Father's
teaching the Son, see above
on v. <ref target='V_19'>19</ref>, <ref target='V_20'>20</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>29. Et qui me misit, mecum
est et non reliquit me solum,
quia ego quae placita sunt ei,
facio semper.</cell>
<cell>29. And he that sent me is
with me, and he hath not left
me alone: for I do always
the things that please him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
29. <hi rend='bold'>For.</hi> <q>The word seems
to be used as in Luke vii. 47, to
indicate the sign of the truth of
the statement made, and not to
give the ground of the fact
stated</q> (Westc.).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>30. Haec illo loquente, multi
crediderunt in eum.</cell>
<cell>30. When he spoke these
things, many believed in him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>31. Dicebat ergo Iesus ad
eos, qui crediderunt ei Iudaeos:
Si vos manseritis in sermone
meo, vere discipuli mei eritis:</cell>
<cell>31. Then Jesus said to those
Jews who believed him: If
you continue in my word, you
shall be my disciples indeed.</cell></row></table>

<p>
31. Christ here lays down
the test by which His disciples
are to be known. It is only
when we accept His words,
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
and conform our works thereto,
that we can be truly said to be
His disciples.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>32. Et cognoscetis veritatem,
et veritas liberabit vos.</cell>
<cell>32. And you shall know the
truth, and the truth shall
make you free.</cell></row></table>

<p>
32. <hi rend='bold'>The truth</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the
whole body of revelation.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>33. Responderunt ei: Semen
Abrahae sumus, et nemini
servivimus unquam: quomodo
tu dicis: Liberi eritis?</cell>
<cell>33. They answered him:
We are the seed of Abraham,
and we have never been slaves
to any man: how sayest thou:
You shall be free?</cell></row>
<row><cell>34. Respondit eis Iesus:
Amen, amen dico vobis: quia
omnis qui facit peccatum, servus
est peccati:</cell>
<cell>34. Jesus answered them:
Amen, amen, I say unto you,
that whosoever committeth
sin, is the servant of sin.</cell></row>
<row><cell>35. Servus autem non manet
in domo in aeternum: filius
autem manet in aeternum:</cell>
<cell>35. Now the servant abideth
not in the house for ever: but
the son abideth for ever:</cell></row>
<row><cell>36. Si ergo vos filius liberaverit,
vere liberi eritis.</cell>
<cell>36. If therefore the son shall
make you free, you shall be
free indeed.</cell></row></table>

<p>
33-36. To Christ's promise
that the truth should make
them free, some of the crowd
who remained incredulous,
replied that they were never
slaves, to which Christ makes
answer that they are the slaves
of sin: and only when the
Son of God shall free them,
shall they be truly free. Verse
35 is an illustration drawn
from ordinary life. As slaves
who displease their masters may
be sold, or expelled from the
household, so you who, instead
of serving God, are the slaves
of sin, are, and shall remain,
excluded from the household
of God here and hereafter.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>37. Scio quia filii Abrahae
estis: sed quaeritis me interficere,
quia sermo meus non
capit in vobis.</cell>
<cell>37. I know that you are the
children of Abraham: but you
seek to kill me, because my
word hath no place in you.</cell></row>
<row><cell>38. Ego quod vidi apud
Patrem meum loquor, et vos
quae vidistis apud patrem vestrum,
facitis.</cell>
<cell>38. I speak that which I
have seen with my Father:
and you do the things that
you have seen with your father.</cell></row></table>

<p>
38. <hi rend='bold'>Your father</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the
devil (see verse <ref target='VIII_44'>44</ref>). Others
understand ποιεῖτε as an imperative;
do then the works which
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
you have seen with your father
(Abraham). But since the
following verse proves that
the Jews understood Christ to
speak of another father than
Abraham, for this reason, and
because of verse 44, the first
interpretation is preferable.
The sense then is: You do
the works that you have learned
from your father the devil.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>39. Responderunt, et dixerunt
ei: Pater noster Abraham
est. Dicit eis Iesus: Si filii
Abrahae estis, opera Abrahae
facite.</cell>
<cell>39. They answered, and said
to him: Abraham is our father.
Jesus saith to them: If you be
the children of Abraham, do
the works of Abraham.</cell></row></table>

<p>
39. <hi rend='bold'>If you be the children
of Abraham, do the works of
Abraham.</hi> The Greek is: If
you <emph>were</emph> the (true) children of
Abraham, you would do the
works of Abraham.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>40. Nunc autem quaeritis
me interficere, hominem qui
veritatem vobis locutus sum,
quam audivi a Deo: hoc
Abraham non fecit.</cell>
<cell>40. But now you seek to kill
me, a man who have spoken
the truth to you, which I have
heard of God. This Abraham
did not.</cell></row>
<row><cell>41. Vos facitis opera patris
vestri. Dixerunt itaque ei:
Nos ex fornicatione non sumus
nati: unum patrem habemus
Deum.</cell>
<cell>41. You do the works of
your father. They said therefore
to him: We are not born
of fornication: we have one
Father <hi rend='italic'>even</hi> God.</cell></row>
<row><cell>42. Dixit ergo eis Iesus: Si
Deus pater vester esset, diligeretis
utique me: ego enim
ex Deo processi, et veni: neque
enim a me ipso veni, sed ille
me misit.</cell>
<cell>42. Jesus therefore said to
them: If God were your father,
you would indeed love me.
For from God I proceeded,
and came: for I came not of
myself, but he sent me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
41, 42. Understanding Christ
to mean that they were not
true Jews, but idolaters (πορνέια
being frequently used of idolatry
in the Bible; <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Ezech. xvi.
15, foll.; see ii. <ref target='II_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='II_5'>5</ref>,), they
protest that they are not idolaters,
and that they worship but
one God. To this Christ
replies, that if they were
true children of God, they
would love Himself. <hi rend='bold'>I proceeded
and came</hi>, denote
respectively the eternal generation,
and mission in
time.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>43. Quare loquelam meam
non cognoscitis? Quia non
potestis audire sermonem
meum.</cell>
<cell>43. Why do you not know
my speech? Because you
cannot hear my word.</cell></row></table>

<p>
43. The sense is: why do
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
you not understand My discourses
(λαλιάν) on this and on
other occasions? The reason
is, because you cannot, you
<emph>will not</emph>, receive My doctrine
(λόγος). What we do not
desire to hear, we are slow to
understand. Christ's teaching,
so opposed to flesh and blood,
so much at variance with all
that the Jews had hoped for
from their Messias, they were
very unwilling to accept.
<q>Ideo audire non poterant,
quia corrigi credendo nolebant</q>
(St. August.).
</p>

<anchor id='VIII_44'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>44. Vos ex patre diabolo
estis: et desideria patris vestri
vultis facere. Ille homicida
erat ab initio, et in veritate
non stetit: quia non est veritas
in eo: cum loquitur mendacium,
ex propriis loquitur, quia
mendax est, et pater eius.</cell>
<cell>44. You are of <hi rend='italic'>your</hi> father
the devil, and the desires of
your father you will do. He
was a murderer from the beginning,
and he stood not in
the truth; because truth is not
in him. When he speaketh a
lie, he speaketh of his own:
for he is a liar, and the father
thereof.</cell></row></table>

<p>
44. At last He plainly tells
them who their father is. <hi rend='bold'>He
was a murderer from the
beginning</hi>, for he tempted
Eve, and thus brought death
upon the human race, and he
prompted Cain to slay Abel.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And he stood not in the
truth</hi>; or rather, he <emph>standeth</emph>
not in the truth (the perfect of
this verb having a present signification.
See Winer, <hi rend='italic'>Gr.
Gram. N. T.</hi>, p. 342<note place='foot'>It is hardly necessary to remind the reader that the present of this verb
means to place, and hence the perfect means, I have placed myself, or stand.</note>), because
there is no truth in his nature.
St. Augustine argued from this
verse to prove the fall of the
rebel angels: <q>Ergo in veritate
fuit, sed non stando cecidit,
et de veritate lapsus est.</q> But
the conclusion is not warranted
by this verse, for the true
meaning of ἕστηκεν, and the
reason given by our Lord for
the devil's not standing in the
truth&mdash;namely, <hi rend='italic'>because truth is
not in him</hi>, show that there is
no reference to the devil as he
was before the fall, but only
to his nature and methods
since. <hi rend='bold'>Of his own</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, in
accordance with his nature.
<hi rend='bold'>The father thereof</hi>, namely, of
<emph>lying</emph>. We thus, with Beelen,
refer αὐτοῦ (ejus) to ψεύδους
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
(understood). <q>Αὐτοῦ, scil.
ψεύδους quae vox sumi debet
ex antegressa ψεύστης in qua
veluti continetur</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Gr. Gram.
N. T.</hi>, page 104).
</p>

<anchor id='VIII_45'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>45. Ego autem si veritatem
dico, non creditis mihi.</cell>
<cell>45. But if I say the truth,
you believe me not.</cell></row></table>

<p>
45. Instead of <q>si</q> (Vulg.)
the Greek has ὅτι (quia): because
I speak the truth.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>46. Quis ex vobis arguet me
de peccato? Si veritatem dico
vobis, quare non creditis mihi?</cell>
<cell>46. Which of you shall convince
me of sin? If I say the
truth to you, why do you not
believe me?</cell></row></table>

<p>
46. Christ appeals to His integrity
of character and innocence
of life; as if He said: it
cannot be My life that prevents
you from believing: so that if
My doctrine is true, you have
no excuse.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>47. Qui ex Deo est, verba
Dei audit. Propterea vos non
auditis, quia ex Deo non estis.</cell>
<cell>47. He that is of God,
heareth the words of God.
Therefore you hear them not,
because you are not of God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
47. <q>He assigns the cause
of their not believing or obeying
His words, viz., because
they are not of God. They are
not children of God, sharers in
His spirit; but rather children
of the devil, filled with his
spirit</q> (M'Evilly).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>48. Responderunt ergo Iudaei,
et dixerunt ei: Nonne
bene dicimus nos quia Samaritanus
es tu, et daemonium
habes?</cell>
<cell>48. The Jews therefore answered
and said to him: Do
not we say well that thou art
a Samaritan, and hast a devil?</cell></row>
<row><cell>49. Respondit Iesus: Ego
daemonium non habeo: sed
honorifico Patrem meum, et
vos inhonorastis me.</cell>
<cell>49. Jesus answered: I have
not a devil; but I honour my
Father, and you have dishonoured
me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
48, 49. They say to Him
that He is a Samaritan, and
has a devil. The first charge
He passes over as unworthy of
notice; to the second He replies
that, so far from having a devil,
He honours His Father, while
they dishonour Himself. On
account of His language,
strange to them, and His
earnest fervour, they say that
He is possessed; and He
replies that His words and
manner are due to the fact
that He is seeking the glory of
His Father.
</p>

<anchor id='VIII_50'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>50. Ego autem non quaero
gloriam meam: est qui quaerat,
et iudicet.</cell>
<cell>50. But I seek not my own
glory: there is one that seeketh
and judgeth.</cell></row></table>

<p>
50. But though <emph>you dishonour</emph>
(the Greek has the
present in end of 49) <emph>Me</emph>, I
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
will not seek to avenge the
dishonour; the Father will
avenge it. See Deut. xviii. 19.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>51. Amen, amen dico vobis:
si quis sermonem meum servaverit,
mortem non videbit in
aeternum.</cell>
<cell>51. Amen, amen, I say to
you: If any man keep my
word, he shall not see death
for ever.</cell></row></table>

<p>
51. In verse 32, He promised
freedom, now He promises immortality,
to those that hearken
to His words.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>52. Dixerunt ergo Iudaei:
Nunc cognovimus quia daemonium
habes. Abraham mortuus
est, et prophetae: et tu
dicis: Si quis sermonem meum
servaverit, non gustabit mortem
in aeternum.</cell>
<cell>52. The Jews therefore said:
Now we know that thou hast
a devil. Abraham is dead, and
the prophets: and thou sayest:
If any man keep my word he
shall not taste death for ever.</cell></row>
<row><cell>53. Numquid tu maior es
patre nostro Abraham, qui
mortuus est? et prophetae
mortui sunt. Quem teipsum
facis?</cell>
<cell>53. Art thou greater than
our father Abraham, who is
dead? and the prophets are
dead. Whom dost thou make
thyself?</cell></row></table>

<p>
52, 53. The Jews accuse
Him of preferring Himself to
Abraham and the prophets, to
which He replies&mdash;
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>54. Respondit Iesus: Si ego
glorifico, meipsum, gloria mea
nihil est: est Pater meus, qui
glorificat me, quem vos dicitis
quia Deus vester est.</cell>
<cell>54. Jesus answered: If I
glorify myself, my glory is
nothing. It is my Father that
glorifieth me, of whom you
say that he is your God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
54. If I glorify Myself, <emph>let it go
for nought</emph>; it is My Father, &amp;c.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>55. Et non cognovistis eum.
Ego autem novi eum: et si
dixero quia non scio eum, ero
similis vobis, mendax. Sed
scio eum, et sermonem eius
servo.</cell>
<cell>55. And you have not known
him, but I know him. And if
I shall say that I know him
not, I shall be like to you, a
liar. But I do know him, and
do keep his word.</cell></row></table>

<p>
55. The Jews knew not the
Father as the Father of Christ;
moreover, they knew Him not
at all with a practical knowledge
so as to serve Him.
</p>

<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>56. Abraham pater vester
exultavit ut videret diem
meum: vidit, et gavisus est.</cell>
<cell>56. Abraham your father
rejoiced that he might see my
day: he saw it, and was glad.</cell></row></table>

<p>
56. <hi rend='bold'>Abraham your father
rejoiced</hi>, &amp;c. He leaves it to
be inferred that He, being the
object of Abraham's hope and
joy, is greater than Abraham,
and still not opposed to him.
Our Lord's <emph>day</emph> here is not the
eternal existence of the Son,
nor the day of His death, nor
Himself, the day-star of justice,
but the day for which all the
ancient just had so long prayed
and sighed: <q><hi rend='italic'>drop down dew,
ye heavens, from above, and let
the clouds rain the just</hi></q> (Is.
xlv. 8), the day or time of
Christ's mortal life on earth.
<hi rend='bold'>Rejoiced that he might see</hi> (ἵνα
ἴδη). Most probably the meaning
is, that Abraham, after
God had revealed to him that
the Messias was to be born of
his seed, hoped and yearned
in joyful confidence that he
might see Christ on earth.
<hi rend='bold'>He saw it, and was glad.</hi> It
would seem from these words
that Abraham saw in the way
in which he had yearned to
see. And since he cannot have
yearned to see Christ's day
merely by faith, for he already
saw it by faith; hence there
must be question here of some
other vision. Mald., A Lap.,
and most commentators hold
that Abraham's mental vision
was elevated by God, so that
from limbo he saw and knew
that Christ was on earth just
as the angels and saints in
heaven know what happens
on earth and in hell. The aorist
tenses in the Greek (εἶδεν καὶ
ἐχάρη), with their past definite
signification, are not easily
reconciled with this view, and
hence others prefer to suppose
that there is reference to some
very special revelation made
to Abraham during his life on
earth, in which he saw with
something more than the
vision of ordinary faith the
time and various circumstances
of Christ's mortal life (compare
Heb. xi. 13).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>57. Dixerunt ergo Iudaei
ad eum: Quinquaginta annos
nondum habes, et Abraham
vidisti?</cell>
<cell>57. The Jews therefore said
to him: Thou art not yet
fifty years old, and hast thou
seen Abraham?</cell></row></table>

<p>
57. In saying Christ was not
yet fifty years of age, they take
an age about which there could
be no dispute, as if they said:
at the very outside Thou art
not yet fifty years old, and hast
Thou seen Abraham? The
common opinion is that Christ
died in his thirty-fourth year,
though, strange to say, St.
Irenæus held the singular view
that he lived to be fifty. (Iren.,
<hi rend='italic'>Adv. Haer.</hi>, ii. 39, 40.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>58. Dixit eis Iesus: Amen,
amen dico vobis, antequam
Abraham fieret, ego sum.</cell>
<cell>58. Jesus said to them:
Amen, amen, I say to you,
before Abraham was made, I
am.</cell></row></table>

<p>
58. In verse 56, He spoke
of the day of His mortal life,
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
now He declares His eternity.
<hi rend='bold'>Amen, amen, I say to you,
before Abraham was made</hi>
(γενέσθαι, came into being), <hi rend='bold'>I
am</hi> (ἐγώ εἴμι).
</p>

<anchor id='VIII_59'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>59. Tulerunt ergo lapides,
ut iacerent in eum. Iesus
autem abscondit se, et exivit
de templo.</cell>
<cell>59. They took up stones
therefore to cast at him. But
Jesus hid himself, and went
out of the temple.</cell></row></table>

<p>
59. Understanding Him to
claim to be eternal, as He really
did, they took up stones to
stone Him, the Law commanding
that a blasphemer, as they
accounted Him, should be
stoned (Lev. xxiv. 16). But
Jesus hid Himself, most probably
rendered Himself invisible,
and thus passed out of
the temple, showing us that it
is sometimes advisable, and
conducive to the greater glory
of God, that we should flee
from danger, even when we
are persecuted for God's sake.
Many ancient authorities add
at the end of this verse: <q>And
going through the midst of
them went His way, and
so passed by;</q> but more
probably the words are a
gloss.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_IX'/>
<head>Chapter IX.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-7. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus cures a man born blind.</hi>
</p>

<p>
8-13. <hi rend='bold'>Comments of the man's neighbours, who bring him to the
Pharisees.</hi>
</p>

<p>
14. <hi rend='bold'>It was on the Sabbath day the cure was wrought.</hi>
</p>

<p>
15-23. <hi rend='bold'>Interview between the man and the Pharisees. They refuse to
believe that he had been blind, and summon his parents in
order to ascertain the truth. The parents declare that he had
indeed been born blind.</hi>
</p>

<p>
24-34. <hi rend='bold'>Again therefore the Pharisees interrogate the man himself, and at
length, wincing under his remarks and indignant with him for
his favourable opinion of Jesus, they expel him from their
assembly.</hi>
</p>

<p>
35-38. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus finds him, and now illumines the darkness of his soul.</hi>
</p>

<p>
39-41. <hi rend='bold'>The blindness of the Pharisees.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Et praeteriens Iesus vidit
hominem caecum a nativitate:</cell>
<cell>1. And Jesus passing by,
saw a man who was blind
from his birth.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. Some think that the events
about to be narrated occurred
shortly after Christ left the
temple (viii. 59) and had been
rejoined by His disciples, who
are supposed to have left when
He disappeared. This view
seems to us more probable
than that which places the
events about to be narrated on
a different day from those
referred to in the close of the
preceding chapter. When we
are told that Jesus went out
of the temple (viii. 59), and
passing by, saw a man blind
from his birth, the natural inference
is, that the Evangelist
is speaking of Christ's passing
along after He left the temple.
This view is confirmed too by
the fact, that <hi rend='bold'>Jesus</hi> should not
be read in this verse, being
spurious according to all critics,
but must be supplied from the
preceding chapter.
</p>

<p>
The man was <hi rend='bold'>blind from
his birth</hi>, so that it was no
mere passing affection of the
eyes, from which he suffered;
and thus the miracle was the
more striking.
</p>

<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. Et interrogaverunt eum
discipuli eius: Rabbi, quis
peccavit, hic, aut parentes eius,
ut caecus nasceretur?</cell>
<cell>2. And his disciples asked
him: Rabbi, who hath sinned,
this man, or his parents, that
he should be born blind?</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. How the disciples knew
the man had been <hi rend='bold'>born blind</hi>,
we are not told. To excite
greater compassion, and probably
to obtain alms, he may
have been himself proclaiming
the fact. It was reasonable
enough that the disciples should
think of the sins of the man's
parents as the reason why he
was born blind, for God Himself
tells us that He is <q>jealous,
visiting the iniquities of the
fathers upon the children unto
the third and fourth generation</q>
(Exod. xx. 5). And we
know that David was punished
by the death of his child
(2 Kings xii. 14). But why
should the disciples imagine
that the man might have been
born blind on account of <emph>his
own</emph> sins? Some think that the
disciples may have been imbued
with the false notions of the
Jews regarding the transmigration
of souls, and have
thought that this man's soul
had sinned in some previous
state of existence, and been
therefore imprisoned in a blind
body. But it is unlikely that
the disciples at this time, the
third year of our Lord's public
life, were still in such ignorance.<note place='foot'>Besides the Pharisees believed that only the <emph>good</emph> souls passed into other
bodies. See Josephus, <hi rend='italic'>Ant.</hi>, viii. 1, 3; <hi rend='italic'>B. Jud.</hi>, ii. 8, 14.</note>
Others think that the
question means: was he born
blind for some sin which it <emph>was
foreseen</emph> he would commit?
Others think that the question
was hastily put without advertence
to its absurdity.
Others that the meaning is:
was it for his own, or, <emph>since
that is out of the question</emph>, was
it for the sin of his parents that
this man was born blind?
</p>

<anchor id='IX_3'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Respondit Iesus: Neque
hic peccavit, neque parentes
eius: sed ut manifestentur
opera Dei in illo.</cell>
<cell>3. Jesus answered: Neither
hath this man sinned, nor his
parents; but that the works
of God should be made
manifest in him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. Christ replies that neither
the man himself nor his parents
had sinned, so as to explain his
blindness&mdash;ἵνα, as a <emph>cause</emph> why
he should be born blind; but
his blindness was ordained, or
at least permitted, for the sake
of the miracle which Christ was
now about to work.
</p>

<anchor id='IX_4'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Me oportet operari opera
eius qui misit me, donec dies
est: venit nox, quando nemo
potest operari.</cell>
<cell>4. I must work the works
of him that sent me, whilst it
is day: the night cometh
when no man can work.</cell></row></table>

<p>
4. <hi rend='bold'>Day</hi> is here the span of
Christ's mortal life: <hi rend='bold'>night</hi>
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
the time after death, when
Christ was no longer to perform
works visibly before men.
Of course, as God, Christ still
works, <q>sustaining all things by
the word of His power</q> (Heb.
i. 3), but of this Divine operation
there is no question here.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. Quamdiu sum in mundo,
lux sum mundi.</cell>
<cell>5. As long as I am in the
world, I am the light of the
world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
5. <hi rend='bold'>The light.</hi> See i. <ref target='I_3'>4</ref>, <ref target='I_5'>5</ref>.
Christ was the spiritual light,
and as a symbol and proof of
His office of spiritual light-giver,
He was now about to
open the eyes of the blind man
to the light of day.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Haec cum dixisset, exspuit
in terram, et fecit lutum ex
sputo, et linivit lutum super
oculos eius.</cell>
<cell>6. When he had said these
things, he spat on the ground,
and made clay of the spittle,
and spread the clay upon his
eyes.</cell></row></table>

<p>
6. <hi rend='bold'>He spat on the ground.</hi>
Of course such ceremonies as
that here recorded were wholly
unnecessary to Christ for
effecting the cure. Why He
sometimes used them it is hard
to say; perhaps to help to
excite the faith of those who
were being cured. <q>Those
who impiously jeer at the use
of ceremonies, and material
elements in connection with
spiritual effects, which they
symbolize, have a clear refutation
in this action, and
several similar actions on the
part of our Divine Redeemer
for similar effects (Mark vii.
33; viii. 23).</q> (McEvilly).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Et dixit ei: Vade, lava in
natatoria Siloe (quod interpretatur
Missus). Abiit ergo, et
lavit, et venit videns.</cell>
<cell>7. And said to him: Go,
wash in the pool of Siloe,
which is interpreted, Sent.
He went therefore, and washed,
and he came seeing.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. St. John interprets for his
readers the Hebrew name
(שׂלוח) of the pool. Some
have regarded the interpretation
as the gloss of a copyist
or interpreter; but there is
practically no authority for
doubting that it was written
by St. John. Doubtless the
pool bore this name for some
mystic reason; by the natural
salubrity of its waters, or by
a supernatural virtue, like
Bethesda (v. 2), it may have
typified <emph>Him who was sent</emph> from
God to heal men. The pool
which still retains its old name
<hi rend='italic'>Birket Silwan</hi>, is one of the
few undisputed sites at Jerusalem.
St. Jerome speaks of
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
the spring which supplied it
as situated at the foot of Mount
Sion, and mentions also the
intermittent character of the
spring. See Isaiah viii. 6. In
another place St. Jerome speaks
of Siloe as situated at <q>the
foot of Mount Moria,</q> so that
there is no reason for doubting
that the pool was situated in
the valley called Tyropaeon,
which separated Mount Sion
from Mount Moria, just where
<hi rend='italic'>Birket Silwan</hi> is still to be seen.
See also Josephus, <hi rend='italic'>Bella Jud.</hi>,
v. 4. 1. The blind man journeying
towards the pool, with clay
upon his eyes, must have attracted
the attention of many,
and thus helped to make the
miracle more public. That one
born blind, and accustomed to
move about Jerusalem, would
be able to find his way to the
pool, there is no reason to
doubt; in any case there need
be no difficulty raised on this
point, as he could probably
have readily found some one
willing to guide him.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>8. Itaque vicini, et qui viderant
eum prius quia mendicus
erat, dicebant: Nonne hic est
qui sedebat et mendicabat?
Alii dicebant: Quia hic est.</cell>
<cell>8. The neighbours therefore,
and they who had seen him
before that he was a beggar,
said: Is not this he that sat,
and begged? Some said: This
is he.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Alii autem: Nequaquam,
sed similis est ei. Ille vero
dicebat: Quia ego sum.</cell>
<cell>9. But others <hi rend='italic'>said</hi>: No, but
he is like him. But he said:
I am he.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Dicebant ergo ei: Quomodo
aperti sunt tibi oculi?</cell>
<cell>10. They said therefore to
him: How were thy eyes
opened?</cell></row>
<row><cell>11. Respondit: Ille homo
qui dicitur Iesus, lutum fecit,
et unxit oculos meos, et dixit
mihi: Vade ad natatoria Siloe,
et lava, Et abii, et lavi, et video.</cell>
<cell>11. He answered: That
man that is called Jesus,
made clay, and anointed my
eyes, and said to me: Go to
the pool of Siloe, and wash.
And I went, I washed, and I
see.</cell></row></table>

<p>
11. <hi rend='bold'>He answered: That
man</hi> (ὁ ἄνθρωπος is the true
reading) <hi rend='bold'>that is called Jesus.</hi>
He yet recognises in Christ
only a holy man, but refers
to Him as one who was
well known and much spoken
of.
</p>

<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Et dixerunt ei: Ubi est
ille? Ait: Nescio.</cell>
<cell>
12. And they said to him:
Where is he? He saith: I
know not.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13. Adducunt eum ad pharisaeos
qui caecus fuerat.</cell>
<cell>13. They bring him that
had been blind to the Pharisees.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. Why they brought him to
the Pharisees is not certain; probably
in order to have the facts
sifted more closely, and perhaps
to have Christ condemned of
violating the Sabbath (verse 14).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Erat autem sabbatum,
quando lutum fecit Iesus, et
aperuit oculos eius.</cell>
<cell>14. Now it was the sabbath
when Jesus made the clay and
opened his eyes.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15. Iterum ergo interrogabant
eum pharisaei quomodo
vidisset. Ille autem dixit eis:
Lutum mihi posuit super
oculos, et lavi, et video.</cell>
<cell>15. Again therefore the
Pharisees asked him, how he
had received his sight. But
he said to them: He put clay
upon my eyes, and I washed,
and I see.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16. Dicebant ergo ex pharisaeis
quidam: Non est hic
homo a Deo, qui sabbatum
non custodit. Alii autem dicebant:
Quomodo potest homo
peccator haec signa facere?
Et schisma erat inter eos.</cell>
<cell>16. Some therefore of the
Pharisees said: This man is
not of God, who keepeth not
the sabbath. But others said:
How can a man that is a
sinner do such miracles? And
there was a division among
them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>17. Dicunt ergo caeco iterum:
Tu quid dicis de illo qui
aperuit oculos tuos? Ille autem
dixit: Quia propheta est.</cell>
<cell>17. They say therefore to
the blind man again: What
sayest thou of him that hath
opened thy eyes? And he
said: He is a prophet.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16, 17. The Pharisees themselves
disagree as to the
character of Christ, and ask
the man who had been cured
(note how he is still spoken of
as blind, just as in the Blessed
Eucharist (vi. 52) the flesh of
Christ is spoken of as bread,
not because it is any longer
bread, but because of what it
is known to have been shortly
before) what he thought of Him
who cured him. His reply
is that Christ is a prophet
(προφητής without the article), a
man sent by God; not <emph>the</emph>
Prophet, for he did not yet recognise
Christ as the Messias.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Non crediderunt ergo
Iudaei de illo quia caecus
fuisset et vidisset, donec vocaverunt
parentes eius qui
viderat:</cell>
<cell>18. The Jews then did
not believe concerning him,
that he had been blind and had
received his sight, until they
call the parents of him that
had received his sight.</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. The Pharisees now doubt
the <emph>fact</emph> of the cure, and send
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
for the man's parents to inquire
if he had indeed been
born blind.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Et interrogaverunt eos,
dicentes: Hic est filius vester,
quem vos dicitis quia caecus
natus est? Quomodo ergo nunc
videt?</cell>
<cell>19. And asked them, saying:
Is this your son, who you say
was born blind? How then
doth he now see?</cell></row>
<row><cell>20. Responderunt eis parentes
eius, et dixerunt: Scimus
quia hic est filius noster, et
quia caecus natus est:</cell>
<cell>20. His parents answered
them and said: We know
that this is our son, and that
he was born blind.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21. Quomodo autem nunc
videat, nescimus: aut quis
eius aperuit oculos, nos nescimus:
ipsum interrogate:
aetatem habet, ipse de se
loquatur.</cell>
<cell>21. But how he now seeth,
we know not: or who hath
opened his eyes, we know not:
ask himself; he is of age, let
him speak for himself.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19-21. Three questions are
put to the parents; to two they
reply: that this is their son,
and that he was born blind;
but to the third they return no
answer, though, doubtless, they
believed their son's account of
the cure.
</p>

<anchor id='IX_22'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Haec dixerunt parentes
eius, quoniam timebant Iudaeos:
iam enim conspiraverant
Iudaei, ut si quis eum confiteretur
esse Christum, extra
synagogam fieret.</cell>
<cell>22. These things his parents
said, because they feared the
Jews: For the Jews had
already agreed among themselves,
that if any man should
confess him to be Christ, he
should be put out of the synagogue.</cell></row></table>

<p>
22. <hi rend='bold'>Put out of the synagogue</hi>;
that is to say, deprived
of all religious intercourse
by a sort of excommunication.
</p>

<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Propterea parentes eius
dixerunt: Quia aetatem habet,
ipsum interrogate.</cell>
<cell>23. Therefore did his parents
say: He is of age, ask him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>24. Vocaverunt ergo rursum
hominem qui fuerat caecus, et
dixerunt ei: Da gloriam Deo:
nos scimus quia hic homo
peccator est.</cell>
<cell>24. They therefore called
the man again that had been
blind, and said to him: Give
glory to God. We know that
this man is a sinner.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. The man himself is again
interrogated. The words: <hi rend='bold'>Give
glory to God</hi> are a sort of
adjuration; as if they said&mdash;remember
you are in the
presence of God, and speak
the truth. See Jos. viii. 19.
And yet while, pretending to
be anxious to hear the truth,
they tried to overawe the poor
man by declaring that they are
convinced already that Christ
is an impostor and sinner.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Dixit ergo eis ille: Si
peccator est, nescio: unum
scio, quia caecus cum essem,
modo video.</cell>
<cell>25. He said therefore to
them: If he be a sinner, I
know not: one thing I know,
that whereas I was blind, now
I see.</cell></row></table>

<p>
25. <hi rend='bold'>Being blind</hi>, τυφλὸς ὤν.
The <emph>present</emph> part. is used relatively
to the time when he
blind.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>26. Dixerunt ergo illi: Quid
fecit tibi: Quomodo aperuit
tibi oculos?</cell>
<cell>26. They said then to him:
What did he to thee? How
did he open thy eyes?</cell></row>
<row><cell>27. Respondit eis: Dixi vobis
iam, et audistis: quid iterum
vultis audire? numquid et vos
vultis discipuli eius fieri?</cell>
<cell>27. He answered them: I
have told you already, and
you have heard: why would
you hear it again? will you
also become his disciples?</cell></row></table>

<p>
27. <hi rend='bold'>You have heard</hi> (Gr. καὶ
οὐκ ἠκούσατε, <hi rend='italic'>You did not heed</hi>).
<hi rend='bold'>Will you also become his
disciples?</hi> These words are
ironical. The man saw that
the Pharisees were hostile to
Jesus, and his natural gratitude
towards his benefactor
made him impatient with
them.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>28. Maledixerunt ergo ei, et
dixerunt: Tu discipulus illius
sis: nos autem Moysi discipuli
sumus.</cell>
<cell>28. They reviled him therefore,
and said: Be thou his
disciple; but we are the
disciples of Moses.</cell></row></table>

<p>
28. <hi rend='bold'>They reviled him</hi>
(ἐλοιδόρησαν) <hi rend='bold'>therefore, and
said: Be thou that man's
disciple</hi>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>29. Nos scimus quia Moysi
locutus est Deus: hunc autem
nescimus unde sit.</cell>
<cell>29. We know that God
spoke to Moses: but as to
this man, we know not from
whence he is.</cell></row></table>

<p>
29. The meaning is: We
know not whether this man is
sent by God or the devil.
</p>

<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>30. Respondit ille homo, et
dixit eis: In hoc enim mirabile
est quia vos nescitis unde sit,
et aperuit meos oculos:</cell>
<cell>30. The man answered, and
said to them: Why herein is
a wonderful thing that you
know not from whence he is,
and he hath opened my eyes.</cell></row></table>

<p>
30. <hi rend='bold'>You</hi> is emphatic; you
the teachers of God's people!
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>31. Scimus autem quia peccatores
Deus non audit: sed
si quis Dei cultor est, et voluntatem
eius facit, hunc exaudit.</cell>
<cell>31. Now we know that God
doth not hear sinners: but if
a man be a server of God, and
doth his will, him he heareth.</cell></row></table>

<p>
31. <hi rend='bold'>Now we know that
God doth not hear sinners.</hi>
These are the words of the
blind man, and we are not
bound to hold that they state
what is true: that they were
spoken by the man, the inspired
Evangelist tells us; and the
<emph>fact</emph> that they were spoken is
all that is covered by inspiration.
But the words are generally
true in the sense in which
the context proves they were
used. For God does not generally
hear sinners so as to work
miracles at their will; and this
is what the words mean. That
God never hears the prayers of
sinners, is not stated here, and
is not true.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>32. A saeculo non est auditum
quia quis aperuit oculos
caeci nati.</cell>
<cell>32. From the beginning of
the world it hath not been
heard, that any man hath
opened the eyes of one born
blind.</cell></row>
<row><cell>33. Nisi esset hic a Deo,
non poterat facere quidquam.</cell>
<cell>33. Unless this man were of
God, he could not do anything.</cell></row></table>

<p>
33. <hi rend='bold'>Anything</hi>; that is to
say, such as the miracle performed
upon me.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>34. Responderunt, et dixerunt
ei: In peccatis natus es
totus, et tu doces nos? Et
eiecerunt eum foras.</cell>
<cell>34. They answered, and
said to him: Thou wast wholly
born in sins, and dost thou
teach us? And they cast him
out.</cell></row></table>

<p>
34. <hi rend='bold'>Thou wast wholly born
in sins</hi>, ὅλος (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>totus</foreign>); that is
to say, altogether, entirely, as
thy blindness proves. And
dost thou, steeped from thy
birth in sin and ignorance, presume
to teach us, the sainted
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
doctors of the Law? <hi rend='bold'>And
they cast him out.</hi> Some
take the sense to be, that they
excommunicated him, but the
obvious meaning is, that they
drove him from their presence,
wherever it was that they were
assembled.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>35. Audivit Iesus quia eiecerunt
eum foras: et cum invenisset
eum, dixit ei: Tu credis
in Filium Dei?</cell>
<cell>35. Jesus heard that they
had cast him out: and when
he had found him, he said to
him: Dost thou believe in the
Son of God?</cell></row></table>

<p>
35. Christ as God knew, of
course, that the man had been
expelled by the Pharisees; but
He waited till He heard it as
man, and then went to seek
for and reward the poor fellow,
who had so intrepidly defended
Him before them. Instead of
<hi rend='bold'>Son of God</hi>, some manuscripts
of great authority read
<hi rend='italic'>Son of Man</hi>; but it is more
probable that the former is the
correct reading. We may
here remark how Christ, who
had cured the blindness of the
body without requiring faith
now asks for faith in Himself
before He will dispel the
deeper darkness of the soul.
<q>Qui fecit te sine te, non justificat
te sine te; fecit nescientem,
justificat volentem</q>
(St. Aug., Serm. 15, <hi rend='italic'>de verbis
Apost.</hi>).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>36. Respondit ille, et dixit:
Quis est, Domine, ut credam
in eum?</cell>
<cell>36. He answered, and said:
Who is he, Lord, that I may
believe in him?</cell></row></table>

<p>
36. Probably the man recognised
the voice of his benefactor,
whom he had not seen
until now, and he at once
shows himself prepared to do
what he understands Christ's
question to suggest. He believed
that Christ who had
cured him, and whom he regarded
as a prophet, would
not deceive him as to who was
really the Son of God. Lord
(Gr. κύριε) ought rather to be
rendered <q>Sir.</q> It is a term of
respect, but does not at all
imply that the man already
recognised Christ to be his
Lord and God, as is clear from
the context.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>37. Et dixit ei Iesus: Et
vidisti eum, et qui loquitur
tecum, ipse est.</cell>
<cell>37. And Jesus said to him:
Thou hast both seen him;
and it is he that talketh with
thee.</cell></row></table>

<p>
37. <hi rend='bold'>Thou hast both seen.</hi>
The meaning is: Thou <emph>seest</emph>
Him, the Greek perfect having
here the force of a present.
See 1 John iii. 6. Christ's reference
to the man's <emph>seeing</emph>,
was doubtless designed to
stimulate his gratitude, and
help him to faith.
</p>

<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>38. At ille ait: Credo Domine.
Et procidens adoravit
eum.</cell>
<cell>38. And he said: I believe,
Lord. And falling down he
adored him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
38. He <hi rend='bold'>adored</hi> Christ as God.
Though the word προσεκύνησεν,
which is here rendered
<q>adored,</q> does not, in our
opinion, necessarily imply
supreme worship in the
Greek of either the Old or
New Testament,<note place='foot'>That προσκύνεω is often used of merely civil worship in the Old Testament
is not denied by anyone; and that it is so used in the New Testament also, see
Matt. xviii. 26, where it is far more probable that προσεκύνει (<q>adorabat,</q> not
<q>orabat,</q> as Vulg.) is the correct reading.</note> still the
context here determines it to
that meaning. For Christ had
just declared Himself to be the
Son of God, and it is <emph>as such</emph>
the man worships Him.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>39. Et dixit Iesus: In iudicium
ego in hunc mundum
veni: ut qui non vident videant,
et qui vident caeci fiant.</cell>
<cell>39. And Jesus said: For
judgment I am come into this
world, that they who see not,
may see: and they who see,
may become blind.</cell></row></table>

<p>
39. <hi rend='bold'>For judgment I am
come into this world.</hi> The
blind man had recovered sight
in two senses&mdash;bodily and
spiritual&mdash;and Christ, as the
occasion naturally suggested,
now goes on to speak of
spiritual blindness. Christ's
words here are not contradictory
of iii. 17 or
viii. 15, because here there
is question of a different
judgment. In those passages
there is question of the judgment
of <emph>condemnation</emph>, for which
Christ did not come at His
first coming; here there is
question of the judgment of
<emph>discernment</emph> (κρίμα, not κρίσις),
and for this He had come at
His first coming. The sense
of the present passage then is:
I am come to separate the
good from the bad; to make
known who love God, and who
do not; to show and to effect
that those who have been regarded
as spiritually blind, and
who, indeed, in many cases,
have been so, may have the
eyes of their souls opened to
the light of truth, while those
who have been thought, and
who think themselves, to see
(such as you Pharisees), may
be shown to be indeed spiritually
blind, and may really <emph>become
more blind</emph>, by being
involved in deeper darkness
through their own unbelief.
This latter effect&mdash;that they
should become more blind&mdash;was
not directly intended by
Christ, but it was foreseen and
permitted, and this is enough
to justify Christ's expression:
<q>That they who see may become
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
blind.</q> Compare Rom.
v. 20: <q>Now the law entered
in that sin might abound.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>40. Et audierunt quidam ex
pharisaeis qui cum ipso erant
et dixerunt ei: Numquid et nos
caeci sumus?</cell>
<cell>40. And some of the Pharisees,
who were with him,
heard; and they said unto
him: Are we also blind?</cell></row>
<row><cell>41. Dixit eis Iesus: Si caeci
essetis, non haberetis peccatum:
nunc vero dicitis: Quia
videmus. Peccatum vestrum
manet.</cell>
<cell>41. Jesus said to them: If
you were blind, you should
not have sin: but now you
say: We see. Your sin remaineth.</cell></row></table>

<p>
40, 41. The Pharisees ask:
<hi rend='bold'>Are we also blind?</hi> and Jesus
replies: <hi rend='bold'>If you were blind,
you should not have sin</hi>;
that is to say, if you were
blind through invincible ignorance,
or, as we prefer to hold,
if you were blind <emph>in your own
estimation</emph>, if you <emph>recognised</emph>
your spiritual blindness, you
should not have sin, because I
would wipe it out; but now
that you <emph>say</emph> you see, and rely
upon yourselves, your sin remaineth.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-5. <hi rend='bold'>The parable (or rather allegory, see below on verse 1), of the
door of the sheepfold.</hi>
</p>

<p>
6. <hi rend='bold'>The Pharisees understood not the parable.</hi>
</p>

<p>
7-10. <hi rend='bold'>Christ, therefore, applies it.</hi>
</p>

<p>
11-18. <hi rend='bold'>The parable of the Good Shepherd.</hi>
</p>

<p>
19-21. <hi rend='bold'>There was a difference of opinion among the Pharisees regarding
Christ.</hi>
</p>

<p>
22-30. <hi rend='bold'>On another occasion the Pharisees ask Him to tell them plainly
if He is the Christ; to whom He replies that He is, and the
Son of God, one in nature with His Father.</hi>
</p>

<p>
31. <hi rend='bold'>Thereupon they took up stones to stone Him.</hi>
</p>

<p>
32-38. <hi rend='bold'>He defends his language by a quotation from their own Psaltery.</hi>
</p>

<p>
39-42. <hi rend='bold'>When they sought to take Him prisoner, He escaped from them,
and crossed over to the east side of the Jordan, where many
believed in him.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<anchor id='X_1'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Amen, amen dico vobis:
qui non intrat per ostium in
ovile ovium, sed ascendit aliunde,
ille fur est, et latro.</cell>
<cell>1. Amen, amen, I say to you:
he that entereth not by the
door into the sheepfold, but
climbeth up another way, the
same is a thief and a robber.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. This verse and those that
follow down to the end of verse
18, are a continuation of the
discourse directed to the Pharisees,
and begun in ix. 39, with
which verse this tenth chapter
might more correctly have
been commenced. The logical
connection of the following
parable with the close of the
preceding chapter is not clear.
Some, as St. Aug., say that
Christ is proving that the
Pharisees were <emph>blind</emph>, else they
would recognise Him as the
<emph>door</emph> through which the true
fold must be entered, and as
the <emph>true Shepherd</emph>. Others, as
St. Chrys., think that He is
replying to a tacit objection of
the Pharisees, to the effect that
they refused to recognise Him,
not because they were blind,
but because He was an impostor.
</p>

<p>
The parable, taken strictly,
is a narrative of a probable
but fictitious <emph>event</emph>, like that
relating to the Prodigal Son
(Luke xv. 11-32). Where, as
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
in the present instance, there
is continued or prolonged
metaphor, without the description
of any event, some would
call it an allegory and not a
parable; but we prefer not to
interfere with a phrase so
familiar as <q>the parable of the
good Shepherd.</q> It will be
noted that we speak of parables,
and not merely of one
parable, for we hold that the
parable of Christ as <emph>door</emph> of
the fold is distinct from that
of Christ as Shepherd. Our
reasons for this will appear as
we proceed. To understand
the grammatical sense of these
two parables, we must bear in
mind what were the relations
of the shepherd to his sheep in
eastern countries, and especially
in Palestine.
</p>

<p>
In the Spring of the year
the Jewish shepherd conducted
his sheep to their pasture,
and there they remained until
the end of the following
Autumn. At night they were
enclosed in folds, the flocks
of several shepherds being
sometimes gathered in the
same fold. The fold, open
overhead, was surrounded by
a wall, in which there was but
one door, at which the doorkeeper
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ostiarius</foreign>) remained
through the night, until the
shepherd's return in the morning.
A thief, wishing to steal
sheep, would, of course, not
attempt to enter by the door,
but would climb the wall. On
the shepherd's return in the
morning the door of the fold
was thrown open by the doorkeeper,
and each shepherd
entered and called his own
sheep, which, knowing his
voice, followed him to their
own pasture. Throughout the
whole day the shepherd remained
with them, guarding
them from wild beasts and
robbers, and attending to the
weak and maimed. Thus his
relations with his sheep were
very close and constant indeed,
and must be carefully borne in
mind, in order that we may
rightly appreciate the full significance
of these beautiful
parables.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>He that entereth not by
the door into the sheepfold.</hi>
If we strip this language of
its metaphorical character, the
sense is: that the teacher who
enters not into the Church
through Christ as the door,
that is to say, by believing in
Christ, is a false teacher, as
were therefore, the Scribes
and Pharisees. Christ, then,
is the door (see verse <ref target='X_7'>7</ref>); the
Church is the sheepfold; and
the Scribes and Pharisees, with
all such, are the thieves and
robbers who injure their fellow-men,
sometimes secretly like
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
thieves, sometimes with open
violence like robbers. That
Christ is signified by <q>the
door,</q> is the view of SS.
Aug., Cyril, Bede, Greg.,
and of A Lap.; and is,
indeed, distinctly stated by
Himself, in verse 7, after His
hearers had failed to understand
His words. Hence we
unhesitatingly reject the view
of Mald. and many others,
who take <q>the door</q> in
verse 1 to be different from
that in verse 7; the latter,
they say, being the door of
the <emph>sheep</emph>, Christ Himself; the
former the door of the shepherds,
which Mald. understands
of <emph>legitimate authority</emph>
to teach. We have no doubt
that the door in both verses
is the same, because Christ
begins to explain, in verse 7:
<q>Jesus <emph>therefore</emph> said to them
again</q> what He had said in
verses 1-5.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. Qui autem intrat per
ostium, pastor est ovium.</cell>
<cell>2. But he that entereth in by
the door, is the shepherd of
the sheep.</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. The sense is that he who
entereth by faith in Christ, and
by Christ's authority, is <emph>a</emph> true
shepherd (ποιμήν, without the
article). Such a pastor is contrasted
with the Pharisees who
blindly refused to enter by the
only gate.
</p>

<anchor id='X_3'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Huic ostiarius aperit, et
oves vocem eius audiunt, et
proprias oves vocat nominatim,
et educit eas.</cell>
<cell>3. To him the porter openeth;
and the sheep hear his voice:
and he calleth his own sheep
by name, and leadeth them out.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. <hi rend='bold'>To him the porter openeth.</hi>
In the higher sense, the
porter is not the Scriptures,
nor Christ Himself, but the
Holy Ghost. To the true
pastor of souls the Holy
Ghost <q>openeth,</q> by giving
him grace to teach and
govern rightly, and by moving
the hearts of the faithful
to listen to and profit by his
teaching.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And leadeth them out.</hi>
It is an obvious and familiar
principle that in explaining
metaphorical language, we are
not to expect resemblance in
all points between the two
things which are implicitly
compared. If we say Patrick
is a lion, we mean that he has
courage or strength; but we
do not mean that he has four
legs. Similarly, though the
Church is compared to a sheepfold,
it does not follow that
because the sheep had to be
led outside the fold in order to
find pasture, that therefore the
faithful must be <hi rend='italic'>led outside the
Church</hi> before they can obtain
the spiritual food of their souls.
No, the Church is a fold which
has its pastures within itself;
and what Christ here declares
is that a good pastor does for
the faithful what the shepherd
does for the sheep when he
leads them forth; namely, he
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
provides them with proper
nourishment.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Et cum proprias oves
emiserit, ante eas vadit: et oves
illum sequuntur, quia sciunt
vocem eius.</cell>
<cell>4. And when he hath let out
his own sheep, he goeth before
them: and the sheep follow
him, because they know his
voice.</cell></row></table>

<p>
4. A good pastor not only
puts before his people the
sound doctrine of faith, and
the right line of duty, but he
also goes before them, guiding
and directing them by his
example, and is rewarded by
their obedience, for <q>the sheep
follow him,</q> and tread in his
footsteps.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. Alienum autem non sequuntur,
sed fugiunt ab eo: quia
non noverunt vocem alienorum.</cell>
<cell>5. But a stranger they follow
not, but fly from him, because
they know not the voice of
strangers.</cell></row></table>

<p>
5. The true reading is μη
ἀκολουθήσουσιν ἀλλὰ φεύξονται,
(<emph>will</emph> not follow, but <emph>will</emph> fly),
the sense, however, being the
same. As the sheep followed
their own shepherd every morning
from the fold to their
pasture, and would follow no
stranger, so faithful Christians
take their spiritual nourishment
from, and are obedient
to, only the true pastor.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Hoc proverbium dixit eis
Iesus. Illi autem non cognoverunt
quid loqueretur eis.</cell>
<cell>6. This proverb Jesus spoke
to them. But they understood
not what he spoke to them.</cell></row></table>

<p>
6. <hi rend='bold'>Proverb.</hi> The Greek
word (παροιμίαν) suggests the
notion of a saying that is deep
and mysterious and not merely
metaphorical. See John xvi.
<ref target='XVI_25'>25</ref>, <ref target='XVI_29'>29</ref>.
</p>

<anchor id='X_7'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Dixit ergo eis iterum
Iesus: Amen, amen dico vobis,
quia ego sum ostium ovium.</cell>
<cell>7. Jesus therefore said to
them again: Amen, amen, I
say to you, I am the door of
the sheep.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus therefore said
to them again</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, <emph>because</emph>
they did not understand, He
explains. As we have said
already, we take the door here
to be the same as in verse 1,
and the reference in both cases
to be to Christ. Here, however,
Christ is spoken of as
the door through which the
sheep, there as the door
through which the shepherd,
entered. But this need create
no difficulty, for as we explained
in our preliminary remarks
on verse 1, there was
only one door on the ordinary
sheepfold, and through it both
sheep and shepherd entered.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>8. Omnes quotquot venerunt, fures sunt et latrones, et
non audierunt eos oves.</cell>
<cell>8. All <hi rend='italic'>others</hi>, as many as
have come, are thieves and
robbers: and the sheep heard
them not.</cell></row></table>

<p>
8. <hi rend='bold'>All others, as many as
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
have come</hi> (many ancient
authorities add <q>before Me</q>).
The sense is: all others who
have come forward before
now, pretending to be the
door, the Messias, <emph>are</emph> thieves
and robbers. The present
<q><emph>are</emph></q> is used to denote the
essential character of their
nature. <hi rend='bold'>But</hi> (ἀλλ᾽, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>at</foreign> not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>et</foreign>)
<hi rend='bold'>the sheep heard them not</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, did not listen to them so
as to remain their disciples.
Many such impostors pretending
to be the Messias had
arisen before this time; such
were Theodas and Judas of
Galilee (Acts v. 36, 37); and,
after the time of Christ, Simon
Magus, Barchochebas, and
others appeared in the same
character.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>9. Ego sum ostium. Per me
si quis introierit, salvabitur:
et ingredietur, et egredietur, et
pascua inveniet.</cell>
<cell>9. I am the door. By me, if
any man enter in, he shall be
saved: and he shall go in, and
go out, and shall find pastures.</cell></row></table>

<p>
9. Christ here declares Himself
the door absolutely; and
therefore, as we have held, the
door of both sheep and shepherds.
He then proceeds to
explain in this verse what this
means in reference to the sheep,
and in next verse what it
means in reference to the shepherds.
<hi rend='bold'>Shall go in and go out</hi>
is a Hebraism (1 Kings xxix.
6; 2 Paral. i. 10; Psalm. cxx.
8), meaning he shall deal
securely, confidently, and
freely.<note place='foot'><q>Significat enim haec phrasis primo securitatem, secundo fiduciam,
tertio libertatem conversandi ubilibet, suo munere fungendi, et quaelibet
negotia peragendi pro Christo et per Christum.</q>&mdash;A Lap.</note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>10. Fur non venit nisi ut
furetur, et mactet, et perdat.
Ego veni ut vitam habeant, et
abundantius habeant.</cell>
<cell>10. The thief cometh not,
but for to steal and to kill and
to destroy. I am come that
they may have life, and may
have it more abundantly.</cell></row></table>

<p>
10. In reference to the pastor,
he who enters not through
Christ (and who is therefore a
thief, verse 1), cometh not but
to steal, &amp;c. This verse effects
the transition from Christ as
door to Christ as shepherd.
He here sets Himself in opposition
to the thief, and so
passes on naturally to another
parable in which He speaks of
Himself as shepherd.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. Ego sum pastor bonus.
Bonus pastor animam suam
dat pro ovibus suis.</cell>
<cell>11. I am the good shepherd.
The good shepherd giveth his
life for his sheep.</cell></row></table>

<p>
11. <hi rend='bold'>I am the good shepherd</hi>
(ὁ ποιμὴν ὁ καλός); that particular
shepherd foretold by
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
the prophets (Ezech. xxxiv. 11,
15, 16, 22, 23; Zach. xi. 17;
Isai. xl. 11). There is no difficulty
in the fact that Christ
now calls Himself the shepherd,
whereas in the preceding
verses He has spoken of Himself
as the door of the sheepfold.
For we hold that a new
parable begins in verse 11, and
it is obviously open to Christ
to use a new metaphor, in
which to express under a new
aspect His relations to the
faithful. See <ref target='XV_1'>xv. 1</ref>, where, in
the metaphor of the true vine,
His relations with the faithful
are set forth under yet another
aspect. <hi rend='bold'>The good shepherd
giveth his life for his sheep.</hi>
This is to be understood, of
Christ, and is the first note of
this great Shepherd.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Mercenarius autem et
qui non est pastor, cuius non
sunt oves propriae, videt lupum
venientem, et dimittit oves, et
fugit: et lupus rapit, et dispergit
oves:</cell>
<cell>12. But the hireling, and he
that is not the shepherd, whose
own the sheep are not, seeth
the wolf coming, and leaveth
the sheep, and flieth: and the
wolf catcheth, and scattereth
the sheep.</cell></row></table>

<p>
12. <hi rend='bold'>The hireling</hi> is most
probably a pastor who has a
divine mission like the Pharisees
(Matt. xxiii. 2) which,
however, he abuses for base
motives of self-interest. Such
an one, and also he who has
no true mission, flieth at the
approach of <emph>any danger</emph>, the
particular danger from the
wolf being put to represent
danger in general.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>13. Mercenarius autem fugit,
quia mercenarius est, et non
pertinet ad eum de ovibus.</cell>
<cell>13. And the hireling flieth,
because he is a hireling; and
he hath no care for the sheep.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. The last word of verse
12 and the first three words of
verse 13 in the Vulgate:
<q>Oves: Mercenarius autem
fugit,</q> are regarded by many
as not genuine; the remaining
portion of verse 13 is to be
connected with <q>flieth</q> of
verse 12, in case they are
omitted.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Ego sum pastor bonus:
et cognosco meas, et cognoscunt
me meae.</cell>
<cell>14. I am the good shepherd;
and I know mine, and mine
know me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
14. Here we have another
note of our great Shepherd,
Jesus Christ. He knows <emph>every
member</emph> of His flock; not
merely the <emph>just</emph>, or the <emph>elect</emph> (as
Aug., Bede, Ypr., Tol.), and
watches over each with special
solicitude. And they, in turn,
know Him with the knowledge
of faith accompanied by charity.
That there is not question
merely of a barren faith, is
proved by the comparison in
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
the next verse between this
knowledge and Christ's. If it
be objected that all Christians
do not love Christ, we reply
that, <emph>as far as in Him lies</emph>, they
do; and the purpose of the
parable is to show Christ's love
and solicitude for His sheep,
to show forth what He does
for them, not what they do for
Him. He knows them, gathers
them into His one fold, saves
them by His grace here, and
conducts them to heaven hereafter.
What the sheep must
do on their part after entering
the fold, is outside the scope
of the parable.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>15. Sicut novit me Pater, et
ego agnosco Patrem: et animam
meam pono pro ovibus
meis.</cell>
<cell>15. As the Father knoweth
me, and I know the Father:
and I lay down my life for my
sheep.</cell></row></table>

<p>
15. Connect with 14: <hi rend='bold'>I
know mine, and mine know
me, as the Father knoweth
me, and I know the Father.</hi>
The knowledge is similar, but
not, of course, equal; just as
our perfection can never equal
the infinite perfection of God,
though Christ says: <q>Be ye
therefore perfect, as your
heavenly Father is perfect.</q>
Matt. v. 48.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And I lay down my life for
my sheep.</hi> Perfect knowledge
and sympathy bring forth the
perfect remedy, and Christ's
knowledge and love of His
sheep receive their fitting consummation
in His sacrifice. The
words <q>I lay down My life</q>
show that Christ gave up His
life freely and voluntarily (see
verse <ref target='X_18'>18</ref>); while the closing words
of the verse prove the vicarious
character of Christ's sacrifice.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Et alias oves habeo, quae
non sunt ex hoc ovili: et illas
oportet me adducere, et vocem
meam audient, et fiet unum
ovile, et unus pastor.</cell>
<cell>16. And other sheep I have,
that are not of this fold; them
also I must bring, and they
shall hear my voice, and there
shall be one fold and one
shepherd.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. Having referred to His
death for men, Christ goes on
to speak of the call of the Gentiles,
thereby indicating the
efficacy of His sacrifice for all,
whether Jews or Gentiles. <hi rend='bold'>And
other sheep I have, that are
not of this fold.</hi> The other
sheep were those Gentiles who
were outside the Jewish Church,
but were to be brought within
the Church of Christ, so that
there might be one fold (rather
<emph>flock</emph>), and one shepherd.
Strictly speaking, the Gentiles
except very few were not yet
His sheep, but those who were
to obey the call are spoken of
as such by anticipation, and
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
because in the designs of God
it was decreed that they should
be efficaciously called to the
faith. <hi rend='bold'>And there shall be one
fold and one shepherd.</hi> The
<q>one fold,</q> or rather <q>one
flock</q> (ποίμνη), distinctly implies
the unity of Christ's
Church, and the <q>one shepherd,</q>
is Jesus Christ Himself
as invisible head, with the Pope
His representative as visible
head.<note place='foot'><q>Patres omnes ... intelligunt de uno pastore <emph>in terris existente</emph> qui
<emph>visibiliter</emph> pascat et regat.</q>&mdash;Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Fide</hi>, Tract. 1, Disp. 9, Sect. 6, n. 3.</note> We have therefore three
very important declarations in
this verse. (1) The faith was
to be preached to the Gentiles;
(2) Christ was to have but one
flock composed alike of Jews
and Gentiles; (3) that one flock
was to have one supreme
visible head. Some, like Mald.,
think that the expression <q><emph>this</emph>
fold</q> implies that there was
another fold, that is to say,
those who were to be called
from among the Gentiles. But
this does not necessarily follow,
as the contrast may be, and we
believe is, not between a fold of
the Jews and a fold of the
Gentiles, but between the fold
of the Jewish Church which
excluded the Gentiles, and the
fold of the Christian Church
which was to include them.
</p>

<anchor id='X_17'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Propterea me diligit
Pater: quia ego pono animam
meam, ut iterum sumam eam.</cell>
<cell>17. Therefore doth the Father
love me: because I lay down
my life that I may take it again.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17. After the parenthetical
statement in verse 16, Christ
takes up what He had said in
the end of verse 15, about laying
down His life. <hi rend='bold'>Therefore</hi>:
that is to say, because I lay
down My life, and so obey
Him, the Father loveth Me.
<hi rend='bold'>That I may take it again.</hi>
<q>Ut</q> (ἱνα) cannot be taken to
express a purpose here, but
means either <emph>so as</emph>, as Mald.
holds, or, <emph>on the condition that</emph>,
as Patrizzi. The supreme
dominion which Christ here
claims over His own life and
death, is a proof of His Divinity.
</p>

<anchor id='X_18'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Nemo tollit eam a me:
sed ego pono eam a meipso,
et potestatem habeo ponendi
eam: et potestatem habeo
iterum sumendi eam. Hoc
mandatum accepi a Patre
meo.</cell>
<cell>18. No man taketh it away
from me: but I lay it down of
myself, and I have power to
lay it down; and I have power
to take it up again. This commandment
have I received of
my Father.</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. <hi rend='bold'>No man taketh it away
from me; but I lay it down
of myself.</hi> Christ declares that
His death would be voluntary,
because He would lay down
His life <emph>freely</emph>. But a difficulty
here presents itself. How was
He free in laying down His
life, if, as He declares, in the
end of this same verse, He had
a command from His Father to
do so? Surely He was bound
not to disobey that command,
and thus bound to die, and so
not free in dying? The difficulty
then is to reconcile Christ's
freedom in dying with the
Father's command that He
should die. Many answers have
been given.
</p>

<p>
(1) The command of the
Father was not really a command
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
or precept, but only a
wish, with which Christ, without
sinning, was free not to
correspond. But this answer
is commonly rejected by commentators
and theologians, who
hold that there was a strict
command. Hence:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(2) Christ was commanded
to redeem man, but not to die.
He could have redeemed us in
many other ways; therefore in
choosing death as the way, He
died freely. But it is replied
to this that St. Paul tells us that
Christ was <hi rend='italic'>obedient even unto
death</hi> (Phil. ii. 8), thereby implying
that His death was
commanded.
</p>

<p>
(3) Christ was commanded
to die, but was left free as to
the manner and circumstances
of His death, and therefore was
free as to the actual death He
underwent upon the cross. But
it is again replied that St. Paul
declares <q>He was obedient
unto death, even the <hi rend='italic'>death of
the cross</hi></q> (Phil. ii. 8).
</p>

<p>
(4) De Lugo and others hold
that Christ's freedom in dying
consisted in the fact that He
could have asked and obtained
a dispensation from His
Father. He freely chose not
to ask a dispensation; therefore
He died freely.
</p>

<p>
(5) Franzelin inclines to the
view that the will of the Father
was merely a <q>beneplacitum,</q>
a wish, until Christ freely
accepted it, when it became a
command: consequent, however,
upon Christ's free acceptance.
Thus, in virtue of this
free acceptance, Christ died
freely, though having a command
from His Father that
He should die.
</p>

<p>
(6) Lastly, there is the
opinion of Suarez, who explains
thus: Christ's human
will had, strictly speaking, the
<emph>power</emph> of resisting the will of
God, and of sinning, and was
therefore free: consequently,
His human will was free in
accepting the command to die,
because, strictly speaking, it
had the power to resist. No
doubt this power could never
be reduced to act in our Divine
Lord, for the Second Divine
Person, in virtue of its hypostatic
union with Christ's
humanity, was bound to preserve
His human will from sin
by the operation of grace.
</p>

<p>
<q>On account of this perpetual
watchfulness on the part
of the Second Divine Person,</q>
says A Lap., who adopts this
opinion, <q>the humanity of
Christ is said to be extrinsically
impeccable; not that the
Divinity took away the <emph>power</emph>
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
of sinning (non quod Verbum
illam (humanitatem) praedeterminaret),
but that it always
supplied the grace, under the
influence of which it was foreseen
that Christ's human will
would freely fulfil each precept.</q>
This view we prefer;
and hence we hold&mdash;(1) that
Christ had a <emph>strict command</emph>
from His Father to die; (2)
that His human will had the
<emph>power</emph> to disobey this command,
and was consequently free in
accepting death; (3) that the
Second Divine Person provided
that this power to disobey
could <emph>never be reduced to act</emph>,
and hence Christ was always
extrinsically impeccable.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Dissensio iterum facta
est inter Iudaeos propter sermones
hos.</cell>
<cell>19. A dissension rose again
among the Jews for these
words.</cell></row>
<row><cell>20. Dicebant autem multi ex
ipsis: Daemonium habet, et
insanit: quid eum auditis?</cell>
<cell>20. And many of them said:
He hath a devil, and is mad:
why hear you him?</cell></row>
<row><cell>21. Alii dicebant: Haec verba
non sunt daemonium habentis;
numquid daemonium potest
caecorum oculos aperire?</cell>
<cell>21. Others said: These are
not the words of one that hath
a devil: Can a devil open the
eyes of the blind?</cell></row></table>

<p>
19-21. Again, as on previous
occasions there was a
difference of opinion among
the leaders of the Jews.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Facta sunt autem encaenia
in Ierosoylmis: et hiems
erat.</cell>
<cell>22. And it was the feast of
the dedication at Jerusalem;
and it was winter.</cell></row></table>

<p>
22. A new chapter might well
have been begun here. The
events and discourses recorded
by the Evangelist, from chapter
viii., probably followed
close upon the Feast of
Tabernacles (vii. 2). Now the
Evangelist suddenly passes on
to the Feast of Purification.
During the period of more
than two months that intervened
(see above on v. <ref target='X_1'>1</ref>),
Christ returned to Galilee
(Luke ix. 51; xiii. 22); or, as
Patrizzi holds, spent his time
in the country parts of Judea,
away from Jerusalem. The
Feast of the Dedication instituted
by Judas Maccabeus,
about 165 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, in memory of
the cleansing of the temple and
dedication of the altar of holocausts
after the defeat of the
Syrians, was celebrated annually
for eight days. The first
day of the feast was the 25th
of Casleu, the ninth month of
the Jewish sacred year, which
corresponded to the latter
part of our November and the
first part of December. See
1 Mach. iv. 59.
</p>

<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Et ambulabat Iesus in
templo, in porticu Salomonis.</cell>
<cell>23. And Jesus walked in
the temple in Solomon's porch.</cell></row></table>

<p>
23. And because it was
winter, Jesus was walking in
Solomon's porch. This was
probably a cloister, open on
one side, and covered overhead,
and stood, according to
Beel. (Comm. on Acts iii. 11), on
the eastern side of the court of
the Gentiles. That the Porch
of Solomon referred to in 3
Kings vi. 3; 2 Paral. iii. 4, is
not meant here (as Mald.
holds), we feel certain; for
that being within the court of
the priests, Christ would not
have been permitted by the
Jewish priests to approach,
much less walk, there.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Circumdederunt ergo
eum Iudaei, et dicebant ei:
Quousque animam nostram
tollis? si tu es Christus, dic
nobis palam.</cell>
<cell>24. The Jews therefore came
round about him, and said to
him: How long dost thou
hold our souls in suspense?
if thou be the Christ tell us
plainly.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. <hi rend='bold'>How long dost thou
hold our souls in suspense?</hi>
The phrase here used by the
Evangelist to record the words
of the Jews is a Hebraism (see
Exod. xxxv. 21; Deut. xxiv.
15; Prov. xix. 23). They
wished Christ to state openly
that He was their Messias,
their King, probably in order
that they might accuse Him
before the Roman authorities
of treason against Rome.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Respondit eis Iesus.
Loquor vobis, et non creditis:
opera quae ego facio in nomine
Patris mei, haec testimonium
perhibent de me:</cell>
<cell>25. Jesus answered them:
I speak to you, and you
believe not: the works that I
do in the name of my Father,
they give testimony of me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>26. Sed vos non creditis,
quia non estis ex ovibus meis.</cell>
<cell>26. But you do not believe:
because you are not of my
sheep.</cell></row></table>

<p>
25, 26. He again appeals to
His miracles, and upbraids
their incredulity.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>27. Oves meae vocem meam
audiunt: et ego cognosco eas,
et sequntur me:</cell>
<cell>27. My sheep hear my
voice: and I know them, and
they follow me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
27. We prefer to understand
the <hi rend='bold'>sheep</hi> here, as in verse
14, not of the just merely, nor
of the elect only, but, with
A Lap., of all the faithful. All
the faithful hear Christ, so as to
<emph>believe</emph>, and in this they are
contrasted with those addressed
in the preceding verse, who
believe not; and all too follow
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
Christ so as to imitate His
example, <emph>as far as lies in
Him</emph>.
</p>

<anchor id='X_28'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>28. Et ego vitam aeternam
do eis: et non peribunt in
aeternum, et non rapiet eas
quisquam de manu mea.</cell>
<cell>28. And I give them life
everlasting; and they shall
not perish for ever, and no
man shall pluck them out of
my hand.</cell></row></table>

<p>
28. In the same sense He
gives them life eternal, and
they shall not perish, and
(= for) no one can snatch them
from His hand. As far as their
salvation depends upon Him,
they shall be saved; they may
indeed fail to correspond with
His grace, but they shall not
perish through His fault. They
may desert Him themselves,
but no one shall snatch them
from Him.
</p>

<anchor id='X_29'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>29. Pater meus quod dedit
mihi, maius omnibus est: et
nemo potest rapere de manu
Patris mei.</cell>
<cell>29. That which my Father
hath given me is greater than
all: and no one can snatch
<hi rend='italic'>them</hi> out of the hand of my
Father.</cell></row>
<row><cell>30. Ego et Pater unum
sumus.</cell>
<cell>30. I and the Father are
one.</cell></row></table>

<p>
29, 30. He proves that no
one shall snatch them from
Him. No one shall snatch
them from the Father (<emph>who</emph> is
greater and more powerful than
all). But I and the Father
are one in nature and power;
therefore no one shall snatch
them from Me. This is the
argument in the more probable
Greek reading, and is more
natural than that afforded by
the Vulgate. We would read
then instead of the present
Vulgate text in verse 29:
<q>Pater meus <emph>qui</emph> dedit mihi
<emph>major</emph> omnibus est,</q> &amp;c.<note place='foot'><q>Lectio Vulgatae ita foret exponenda: Pater <emph>quod</emph> dedit mihi, divinam
naturam secum identicam, id <emph>majus</emph> est rebus omnibus, adeoque omnibus
creaturis potentius; ideoque nemo potest oves rapere de manu mea, sicut nec
de manu Patris, nam <emph>Ego et Pater unum sumus</emph>.... Ceterum si duo versiculi
in Vulgata complexive sumuntur, exprimunt quum Patris omnipotentiam tum
Filii cum Patre consubstantialitem; quae duo dogmata etiam in originali textu
habentur, licet alio modo. Ergo duae lectiones <emph>dogmatice</emph> concordant substantialiter.</q>&mdash;Corl.</note> Note
that the unity with the Father
to which Christ here lays claim
is not a <emph>moral</emph> union, but a
unity of <emph>nature and power</emph>, else
the proof of His statement that
no one could snatch His sheep
from His hands would not be
valid.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>31. Sustulerunt ergo lapides
Iudaei, ut lapidarent eum.</cell>
<cell>31. The Jews then took up
stones to stone him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
31. See above on <ref target='VIII_59'>viii. 59</ref>.
</p>

<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>32. Respondit eis Iesus:
Multa bona opera ostendi vobis
ex Patre meo, propter quod
eorum opus me lapidatis?</cell>
<cell>32. Jesus answered them:
Many good works I have
shewed you from my Father;
for which of those works do
you stone me?</cell></row></table>

<p>
32. <hi rend='bold'>For which of those
works do you stone me?</hi> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
wish to stone Me.<note place='foot'><q>Praesens adhibetur ad significandum id quod <emph>jam jam</emph> eventurum est,
aut quod quis jam in eo est ut faciat.</q>&mdash;Beel., <hi rend='italic'>G. G.</hi>, 41, 2, a.</note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>33. Responderunt ei Iudaei:
De bono opere non lapidamus
te, sed de blasphemia; et quia
tu homo cum sis, facis teipsum
Deum.</cell>
<cell>33. The Jews answered
him: For a good work we
stone thee not, but for
blasphemy; and because that
thou, being a man, makest
thyself God?</cell></row>
<row><cell>34. Respondit eis Iesus:
Nonne scriptum est in lege
vestra quia: Ego dixi, dii
estis?</cell>
<cell>34. Jesus answered them:
Is it not written in your law:
<hi rend='italic'>I said you are gods</hi>?</cell></row></table>

<p>
34. To the charge of blasphemy
Christ replies, and His
reply has been often urged by
Arians and Unitarians to show
that He did not claim to be
the natural Son of God, but
merely meant to call Himself
God in some improper sense,
analogous to that in which the
Sacred Scriptures sometimes
speak of judges, who were
merely men, as gods.
</p>

<p>
The sense of verse 34 is:
men are called gods in your
own law, the reference being
to Psalm lxxxi. 6.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>35. Si illos dixit deos, ad
quos sermo Dei factus est, et
non potest solvi scriptura:</cell>
<cell>35. If he called them gods,
to whom the word of God was
spoken, and the scripture
cannot be broken;</cell></row>
<row><cell>36. Quem Pater sanctificavit,
et misit in mundum, vos dicitis:
Quia blasphemas, quia dixi,
Filius Dei sum.</cell>
<cell>36. Do you say of him,
whom the Father hath sanctified
and sent into the world:
Thou blasphemest, because I
said, I am the Son of God?</cell></row></table>

<p>
35, 36. While all Catholic
commentators and theologians
contend that Christ does not
in these two verses withdraw
His claim to true Divinity, yet
they differ as to the sense of
His reply, and hence as to the
interpretation of the verses.
</p>

<p>
(1) Some, as Franzelin, hold
that Christ here proves both
that He is God, and that He
has a right to call Himself
God. The argument then is
according to these: if your
judges could be called gods,
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
even in an improper sense,
how much more <emph>in the strictest
sense</emph> can He be called and
is He God, whom the Father
generated <emph>holy with His own
holiness</emph>, and sent into the
world?
</p>

<p>
(2) Others, as Maran, Jungmann,
&amp;c., explain the argument
here from the context in
the 81st Psalm. Christ, they
say, reasons thus. If men
could be called gods, as they
are in Sacred Scripture (and
the Sacred Scripture cannot be
gainsaid), how much more, in
a strict sense, can He be called
God, and is He God, whom
the same Scriptures address in
the 8th verse of the same 81st
Psalm: <q>Arise, <emph>O God</emph>, judge
Thou the earth, for Thou shalt
inherit among the nations</q>?
</p>

<p>
(3) Others hold that Christ
in these two verses does not
insist upon the <emph>nature</emph> of His
Sonship, but contents Himself
with showing that He has a
right to <emph>call</emph> Himself God;
then in the following verses
He shows that He is God in
the strictest sense. In this
view Christ prescinds in these
verses from the sense in which
He is God, and shows that <emph>in
some sense</emph>, as the legate of the
Father, He has a right to be
called God. This was sufficient
for the moment to shut the
mouths of His adversaries.
Whether He is God in the
truest and strictest sense, or
only in an improper sense,
He does not here insist,
though His language shows
that even in these verses He
speaks of Himself as truly
God. For the argument shows
that in concluding, in verse 36,
that He has a right to call
Himself <q>Son of God,</q> He
means to justify his original
statement: <q>I and the Father
are one</q> (verse 30); but these
statements are synonymous,
and the one justifies the other
only when there is question of
natural Sonship. No merely
adopted son of God could say
that He is one with the Father.
</p>

<p>
Any of these answers solves
the objection drawn from these
verses against Christ's Divinity;
but we prefer the last, and
hold, therefore, that Christ
first proves against the Pharisees
that He has a right to
<emph>call</emph> Himself God, and then
goes on to show in what sense
He is God.
</p>

<anchor id='X_37'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>37. Si non facio opera Patris
mei, nolite credere mihi.</cell>
<cell>37. If I do not the works of
my Father, believe me not.</cell></row>
<row><cell>38. Si autem facio, et si mihi
non vultis credere, operibus
credite, ut cognoscatis et credatis
quia Pater in me est, et
ego in Patre.</cell>
<cell>38. But if I do, though you
will not believe me, believe the
works: that you may know
and believe that the Father is
in me, and I in the Father.</cell></row></table>

<p>
37, 38. He appeals to His
miracles as a proof that He is
God in the strictest sense.
See notes on <ref target='III_2'>iii. 2</ref>. <hi rend='bold'>That the
Father is in me, and I in the
Father.</hi> According to the
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
fathers, this is a statement
in other words of what He
said above: <q>I and the Father
are one.</q> <q>The Son,</q> says
St. Augustine on this verse,
does not say: <q>The Father is
in Me, and I in Him, in the
sense in which men who think
and act aright may say the
like; meaning that they partake
of God's grace, and are
enlightened by His Spirit. The
Only-begotten Son of God is
in the Father, and the Father
in Him, as an equal in an
equal.</q>
</p>

<anchor id='X_39'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>39. Quaerebant ergo eum
apprehendere: et exivit de
manibus eorum.</cell>
<cell>39. They sought therefore
to take him; and he escaped
out of their hands.</cell></row></table>

<p>
39. <hi rend='bold'>They sought therefore
to take him.</hi> These words
prove that His hearers did not
understand Christ to retract
what He had said.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>40. Et abiit iterum trans
Iordanem, in eum locum ubi
erat Ioannes baptizans primum:
et mansit illic.</cell>
<cell>40. And he went again
beyond the Jordan into that
place where John was baptizing
first: and there he abode.</cell></row></table>

<p>
40. He went again to
Bethania beyond the Jordan.
See above on <ref target='I_28'>i. 28</ref>. The
name of Bethania must have
been dear to our Evangelist,
because it was probably in its
neighbourhood he had first
met his heavenly Master.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>41. Et multi venerunt ad
eum, et dicebant: Quia Ioannes
quidem signum fecit nullum.</cell>
<cell>41. And many resorted to
him, and they said: John
indeed did no sign.</cell></row></table>

<p>
41. <hi rend='bold'>John indeed did no
sign.</hi> This remark is of great
importance as showing how
little tendency there was to invest
great and popular teachers
with miraculous powers. And
yet the Rationalists will have
us believe that our Lord's
miracles were all a popular
delusion!
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>42. Omnia autem quaecumque
dixit Ioannes de hoc, vera
erant. Et multi crediderunt in
eum.</cell>
<cell>42. But all things whatsoever
John said of this man
were true. And many believed
in him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
42. <hi rend='bold'>And many believed in
him.</hi> Most authorities add
the note of place <emph>there</emph> (ἐκεῖ),
as if the Evangelist wished to
bring out into bolder relief the
incredulity of the Jews (verse
39), by contrasting it with the
faith of those beyond the
Jordan.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XI.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-3. <hi rend='bold'>The illness of Lazarus is made known to Christ.</hi>
</p>

<p>
4-10. <hi rend='bold'>After the lapse of two days, Christ proposes to return to Judea;
the disciples try to dissuade Him.</hi>
</p>

<p>
11-16. <hi rend='bold'>Before setting out, He declares that Lazarus is dead.</hi>
</p>

<p>
17-32. <hi rend='bold'>On Christ's approach He is met by the sisters of Lazarus, and
many Jews.</hi>
</p>

<p>
33-44. <hi rend='bold'>Having groaned in the spirit, wept, and returned thanks to His
Father, He raises Lazarus from the dead.</hi>
</p>

<p>
45-53. <hi rend='bold'>Many believed in Him on account of the miracle, but the chief
priests and Pharisees forthwith resolved on putting Him to
death.</hi>
</p>

<p>
54-56. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus retired from the neighbourhood of Jerusalem, and the
chief priests and Pharisees gave orders, that anyone knowing
where He was, should inform upon Him, in order that He
might be arrested.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<anchor id='XI_1'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Erat autem quidam languens
Lazarus a Bethania, de
castello Mariae et Marthae sororis
eius.</cell>
<cell>1. Now there was a certain
man sick named Lazarus, of
Bethania, of the town of Mary
and of Martha her sister.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. <q>The narrative of the
raising of Lazarus is unique
in its completeness. The
essential circumstances of the
fact in regard to persons,
manner, results, are given
with perfect distinctness. The
history is more complete than
that in chapter ix., because the
persons stand in closer connection
with the Lord than the
blind man, and the event itself
had in many ways a ruling
influence on the end of His
ministry. Four scenes are to
be distinguished:&mdash;(1) the prelude
to the miracle (1-16);
(2) the scene at Bethany (17-32);
(3) the miracle (33-44);
(4) the immediate issues of the
miracle (45-57)</q> (Westcott in
the Speakers Comm.).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Bethania.</hi> This <emph>village</emph> lay
nearly two miles east of Jerusalem;
see verse <ref target='XI_18'>18</ref>, and our
remarks on <ref target='VI_18'>vi. 19</ref>. To prevent
the reader from confounding
it with Bethania beyond the
Jordan (<ref target='I_28'>i. 28</ref>), the Evangelist
adds that he means the village
of Mary and of Martha her
sister, who are supposed to be
already known to the reader
from the Synoptic Gospels.
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
See, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Luke x. 38-42.
Bethania is spoken of as their
village, not because they owned
it, but because they resided
there, just as Bethsaida is
called the city of Andrew and
Peter (i. 44). In this village,
then, Lazarus was <emph>seriously</emph> ill
(ἀσθενῶν; see James v. 14).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. (Maria autem erat, quae
unxit Dominum unguento, et
extersit pedes eius capillis suis:
cuius frater Lazarus infirmabatur.)</cell>
<cell>2. (And Mary was she that
anointed the Lord with ointment
and wiped his feet with
her hair: whose brother Lazarus
was sick.)</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. The Greek aorist (ἡ ἀλέιψασα)
shows that the reference
is to some unction that had
already taken place, and not
to that which happened subsequently,
and which is narrated
by our Evangelist (xii. 3;
Matt. xxvi. 7; Mark xiv. 3).
The unction here referred to
we take to be that recorded by
St. Luke (vii. 37, 38); and hence,
notwithstanding their apparently
different characters, we
regard Mary the sister of
Lazarus (xi. 2) as identical with
<q>the woman who was a sinner
in the city</q> (Luke vii. 37). For
St. John in the words: <q>Mary
was she that anointed the
Lord,</q> &amp;c., certainly seems to
speak of an unction already
known to his readers, and
the only unction of Christ,
as far as is known, that
had taken place before this
illness of Lazarus, is that
recorded by St. Luke in the
passage referred to. In this
view, then, our Lord was <emph>twice</emph>
anointed by a woman; on the
first occasion in the house of
Simon the Pharisee (Luke vii.
40, 46), probably in Galilee
(see Luke vii. 11), as recorded
by St. Luke vii. 37, 38; on the
second occasion at Bethania,
in Judea, in the house of Simon
the leper (Matt. xxvi. 6), as recorded
by Matthew, Mark, and
John (J. xii. 3). As the present
verse proves that Mary,
the sister of Lazarus, had
already anointed our Lord:
and as John xii. 3, with its
context, proves that the same
sister of Lazarus again
anointed Him on a subsequent
occasion, we hold that the
only woman referred to in the
Gospels as having anointed
the living body of our Lord, is
Mary, the sister of Lazarus;
and that she did so on <emph>two</emph>
different occasions. Thus, as
already stated, we identify
Luke's <q>sinner in the city</q>
with the sister of Lazarus. If
it be objected that the contemplative
character of the sister
of Lazarus (Luke x. 38-42),
and the close friendship of
Jesus with her and her family
(John xi. 3, 5), forbid us to regard
her as identical with the
woman who had once been <q>a
sinner in the city,</q> we reply
that Mary, converted in the
beginning of our Lord's public
life, had now for some years
led an edifying life of penance.
As a sinner she had lived in
some city of Galilee, far away
from home, whither she may
have gone with some lover
whom she met at Jerusalem at
one of the great festivals; now
she lived with her brother at
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
Bethania, in Judea, where possibly
her former sinful life may
have been unknown, so that
there was no danger of scandal
in Christ's friendship with herself
and her family. To those
who, like Steenkiste (<hi rend='italic'>Comm.
on Matt. Quaes.</hi> 678, <hi rend='italic'>conclusio</hi>),
have <q>a deep-rooted repugnance</q>
to believing that the
sister of Lazarus had ever
been a public sinner, we would
recall the fact that there are
many sinners in heaven to-day
enjoying the society of God
after a far shorter penance
than we require to suppose
in the case of the sister of
Lazarus, before she began to
enjoy the friendship of Christ.
Our Divine Lord's tenderness
and mercy towards sinners are
written on every page of the
Gospels, and the only real
difficulty here is that to which
we have already replied, arising
from the danger of scandal,
through our Lord's associating
with such a woman.
</p>

<p>
Thus far we have spoken
only of <q>the sinner,</q> and the
sister of Lazarus; but there is
a further question, whether
Mary Magdalen (Luke viii. 2;
Matt. xxvii. 56, 61; Matt.
xxviii. 1; John xx. 1, &amp;c.) and
they are all three, one and the
same person. We believe it
to be more probable that they
are. The more common
opinion among the fathers
identifies the three; from the
sixth till the seventeenth century
their identity was unquestioned
in the Western Church;
and our Roman Breviary and
Missal still identify them on the
Feast of St. Mary Magdalen,
the 22nd of July. So, too,
Tertull., Gregory the Great,
Mald., Natal-Alex., Mauduit,
M'Ev., Corluy.
</p>

<p>
We have stated what we
consider the most probable
view&mdash;that Christ was twice
anointed during His public life,
and on both occasions by the
same person, the sister of
Lazarus, who is identical with
<q>the sinner</q> and Magdalen.
It is right, however, that we
should add, that there is great
diversity of opinion, even
among Catholic commentators.
Some have held that
there were three different unctions,
others that there was
only one. Some have held
that the sister of Lazarus,
<q>the sinner,</q> and Magdalen
are all three distinct; others,
that at least the sister of
Lazarus and the sinner are
distinct; and among those
who will not admit the identity
of all three are found such able
commentators as St. Chrys.,
Estius, Calmet, Beelen. In
such a case, where the Scriptures
are obscure, where
the fathers disagree, where
commentators are so divided,
and the Greek Church, which
celebrates three different feasts
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
for the three women, <emph>seems</emph>
(we say <emph>seems</emph>, because the
different feasts might possibly
be celebrated in honour of the
same woman) to differ from
the Latin, it is hard to attain
to anything more than probability,
and we have set forth
above what, after a very careful
examination of the whole
question, seems to us most
probable. See Corl., <hi rend='italic'>Dissert.</hi>,
p. 263 and foll.; Mald. on
Matt. xxvi. 6, 7, and xxvii. 56;
Steenk. on Matt. <hi rend='italic'>Quaes.</hi> 678.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Miserunt ergo sorores eius
ad eum, dicentes: Domine,
ecce quem amas infirmatur.</cell>
<cell>3. His sisters therefore sent
to him, saying: Lord, behold,
he whom thou lovest is sick.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. They merely announce
their trouble through a messenger,
and in hopeful confidence
leave the remedy to
Jesus. <q>Sufficit ut noveris:
non enim amas et deseris</q> (St.
Aug. on this verse).
</p>

<anchor id='XI_4'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Audiens autem Iesus dixit
eis: Infirmitas haec non est ad
mortem, sed pro gloria Dei, ut
glorificetur Filius Dei per eam.</cell>
<cell>4. And Jesus hearing it, said
to them: This sickness is not
unto death, but for the glory of
God: that the Son of God may
be glorified by it.</cell></row></table>

<p>
4. <hi rend='bold'>And Jesus hearing it,
said to them</hi> (<q>to them</q>
(<foreign rend='italic'>eis</foreign>) is not genuine): <hi rend='bold'>This
sickness is not unto death,
but for the glory of God:
that the Son of God may be
glorified by it.</hi> The words of
Christ were obscure until the
miracle threw light upon them.
They mean that the sickness
of Lazarus was not to end in
<emph>ordinary</emph> death, for ordinary
death is the end of mortal life,
whereas Lazarus was to live
again a mortal life. The sickness
and death of Lazarus
were intended to show forth
the Divine power of Jesus in
the miracle to be wrought.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. Diligebat autem Iesus
Martham, et sororem eius
Mariam, et Lazarum.</cell>
<cell>5. Now Jesus loved Martha
and her sister Mary, and
Lazarus.</cell></row></table>

<p>
5. Some connect this verse
with what has gone before, as
giving the reason why the
sisters of Lazarus informed
Jesus of the illness of His
friend. But it is better to connect
with what follows in this
way. Jesus loved Lazarus,
and therefore when He had
remained in the same place two
days, then He said: Let us go
into Judea again, as if He were
unable to remain any longer
away from His friend. Thus
it is not merely His return to
Judea, but His return after
two days, that proves His
friendship. Had He returned
sooner, the miracle of the
raising of Lazarus would have
been less striking, and would not
have afforded to Martha
and Mary such a powerful
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
motive of faith. See below on
verse <ref target='XI_15'>15</ref>.
</p>

<p>
The passing notice here of
a friendship that must have
been the result of long and
intimate intercourse shows us
how incomplete are the Gospel
records. It is very interesting
to notice how in this verse St.
John refers to the love of Jesus
for Lazarus and his sisters by
a different word from that used
by the sisters in verse 3. Instead
of φιλεῖς, which expresses
the affection of personal attachment,
St. John, now that there
is question of the love of Jesus
not only for Lazarus but also
for his sisters, uses Ἠγάπα,
which expresses rather esteem
than love, rather a reasoning
appreciation than a heartfelt
attachment. See below on <ref target='XXI_15'>xxi.
15-17</ref>, where the contrast between
the two words is most
marked.
</p>

<anchor id='XI_6'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Ut ergo audivit quia, infirmabatur,
tunc quidem mansit
in eodem loco duobus diebus.</cell>
<cell>6. When he had heard therefore
that he was sick, he still
remained in the same place two
days.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7. Deinde post haec dixit
discipulis suis: Eamus in Iudaeam
iterum.</cell>
<cell>7. Then after that he said to
his disciples: Let us go into
Judea again.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Dicunt ei discipuli:
Rabbi, nunc quaerebant te
Iudaei lapidare, et iterum vadis
illuc?</cell>
<cell>8. The disciples say to him:
Rabbi, the Jews but now sought
to stone thee: and goest thou
thither again?</cell></row></table>

<p>
8. The disciples, fearing for
His safety and for their own
(see verse <ref target='XI_16'>16</ref>, where Thomas
takes it for granted that return
to Judea meant death to Him
and them), try to dissuade Him
from returning.
</p>

<anchor id='XI_9'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>9. Respondit Iesus: Nonne
duodecim sunt horae diei? Si
quis ambulaverit in die, non
offendit, quia lucem huius
mundi videt:</cell>
<cell>9. Jesus answered: Are there
not twelve hours of the day?
If a man walk in the day, he
stumbleth not, because he seeth
the light of this world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
9. The meaning is: just as a
man walks safely and without
stumbling during the period of
daylight, which is a fixed period
that cannot be shortened: so,
during the time appointed for
My mortal life by My Father,
I am safe, and so are you.
</p>

<anchor id='XI_10'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>10. Si autem ambulaverit in
nocte offendit, quia lux non est
in eo.</cell>
<cell>10. But if he walk in the
night he stumbleth, because the
light is not in him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
10. But after the time of My
mortal life, then, indeed, <emph>you</emph>
may expect persecution and
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
suffering; for when I am gone,
you shall be as men walking
after the sun's light has gone
down.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. Haec, ait, et post haec
dixit eis: Lazarus amicus noster
dormit: sed vado ut a
somno excitem eum.</cell>
<cell>11. These things he said:
and after that he said to them:
Lazarus our friend sleepeth;
but I go that I may awake him
out of sleep.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12. Dixerunt ergo discipuli
eius: Domine, si dormit, salvus
erit.</cell>
<cell>12. His disciples therefore
said: Lord, if he sleep, he shall
do well.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13. Dixerat autem Iesus de
morte ejus: illi autem putaverunt
quia de dormitione somni
diceret.</cell>
<cell>13. But Jesus spoke of his
death; and they thought that
he spoke of the repose of sleep.</cell></row>
<row><cell>14. Tunc ergo Iesus dixit eis
manifeste: Lazarus mortuus
est:</cell>
<cell>14. Then therefore Jesus
said to them plainly: Lazarus
is dead;</cell></row></table>

<p>
11-14. Jesus declares of His
own Divine knowledge (there
is no hint of a second message)
that Lazarus sleeps. The disciples
fail to understand, and
He explains.
</p>

<anchor id='XI_15'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>15. Et gaudeo propter vos,
ut credatis, quoniam non eram
ibi; sed eamus ad eum.</cell>
<cell>15. And I am glad for your
sakes, that I was not there, that
you may believe: but let us go
to him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
15. Jesus rejoices that He
was not with Lazarus, in which
case His tender mercies would
have led Him to prevent the
death of Lazarus, and He rejoices
for the sake of His
disciples, inasmuch as a new
and powerful motive to
<emph>strengthen</emph> their faith would
now be afforded them in the
miracle to be wrought.
</p>


<anchor id='XI_16'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Dixit ergo Thomas,
qui dicitur Didymus, ad condiscipulos:
Eamus et nos, ut
moriamur cum eo.</cell>
<cell>16. Thomas therefore, who is
called Didymus, said to his
fellow-disciples: Let us also go,
that we may die with him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. See verse <ref target='XI_6'>8</ref>. <hi rend='bold'>Thomas</hi>,
Aramaic תאמא, means a twin,
the Greek equivalent being
Didymus. The Greek equivalent
is again mentioned after
the name in <ref target='XX_24'>xx. 24</ref>, <ref target='XXI_2'>xxi. 2</ref>.
Possibly Thomas was commonly
known in Asia Minor as
Didymus.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Venit itaque Iesus: et
invenit eum quatuor dies iam
in monumento habentem.</cell>
<cell>17. Jesus therefore came and
found that he had been four
days already in the grave.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17. <hi rend='bold'>Four days.</hi> The day of
the messenger's arrival would
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
probably be the first day: two
other days our Lord remained
in Peraea after He had received
the news, and one more He
would be likely to spend in the
journey to Bethania. Dying
upon the first day, Lazarus,
according to the custom of the
Jews, that burial should immediately
follow on death (see,
<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Acts v. 6, 10), had been
buried on that same day, as a
comparison of this verse with
39 clearly proves.
</p>

<anchor id='XI_18'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. (Erat autem Bethania
iuxta Ierosolyman quasi stadiis
quindecim.)</cell>
<cell>18. (Now Bethania was near
Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs
off.)</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. See above on verse <ref target='XI_1'>1</ref>,
and especially on <ref target='VI_18'>vi. 19</ref>.
</p>

<anchor id='XI_19'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Multi autem ex Iudaeis
venerant ad Martham et Mariam,
ut consolarentur eas de
fratre suo.</cell>
<cell>19. And many of the Jews
were come to Martha and
Mary, to comfort them concerning
their brother.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. <hi rend='bold'>The Jews</hi>, whom our
Evangelist always carefully
distinguishes from the <q>turba,</q>
or lower class, were leading
men among the people; so
that it appears from this that
the family of Lazarus had a
good social standing.
</p>

<anchor id='XI_20'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Martha ergo ut audivit
quia Iesus venit, occurrit illi:
Maria, autem domi sedebat.</cell>
<cell>20. Martha therefore, as soon
as she heard that Jesus was
come, went to meet him; but
Mary sat at home.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21. Dixit ergo Martha ad
Iesum: Domine si fuisses hic,
frater meus non fuisset mortuus:</cell>
<cell>21. Martha therefore said to
Jesus: Lord, if thou hadst been
here, my brother had not died.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22. Sed et nunc scio quia
quaecumque poposceris a Deo,
dabit tibi Deus.</cell>
<cell>22. But now also I know
that whatsoever thou wilt ask
of God, God will give it thee.</cell></row></table>

<p>
22. Even still she has hope
that He may intercede with
God to restore life to her
brother.
</p>

<anchor id='XI_23'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Dicit illi Iesus: Resurget
frater tuus.</cell>
<cell>23. Jesus saith to her: Thy
brother shall rise again.</cell></row></table>

<p>
23. In words, purposely ambiguous,
and meant to try her
faith, Jesus assures her that
her brother shall rise again.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Dicit ei Martha: Scio
quia resurget in resurrectione
in novissimo die.</cell>
<cell>24. Martha saith to him:
I know that he shall rise again
in the resurrection at the last
day.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. Understanding Him to
speak of the final resurrection,
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
or at least wishing to force
Him to explain, she says:
<hi rend='bold'>I know</hi>, &amp;c. Note how
Martha's words prove the faith
of the Jews of that time in the
resurrection of the body.
</p>

<anchor id='XI_25'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Dixit ei Iesus: Ego sum
resurrectio et vita: qui credit
in me, etiam si mortuus fuerit,
vivet:</cell>
<cell>25. Jesus said to her: I am
the resurrection and the life:
he that believeth in me
although he be dead, shall
live.</cell></row>
<row><cell>26. Et omnis qui vivit et
credit in me, non morietur in
aeternum. Credis hoc?</cell>
<cell>26. And every one that
liveth, and believeth in me
shall not die for ever. Believest
thou this?</cell></row></table>

<p>
25, 26. Christ avails of this
occasion to perfect her faith,
and in the beautiful and consoling
words which we read in
the antiphon of the <hi rend='italic'>Benedictus</hi>
in the Office for the Dead,
declares that He Himself by
His own power, and not merely
by supplication to the Father,
as she imagined (verse <ref target='XI_20'>22</ref>), is
the author of our resurrection
and life. In the following
words He explains what He
means. He who believes in
Me, and dies in the living faith,
which worketh by charity, even
though he be <emph>corporally</emph> dead,
like Lazarus, shall live again a
glorious life, even in his body;
and everyone who is living <emph>in
the body</emph>, and so believeth shall
never die, because though he
shall indeed pass through the
gates of death, I shall quicken
him again to a better life
so that he may be said rather
to have slept than died.<note place='foot'>The bodies of the wicked also shall be raised on the last day, but, as
A Lap. says: <q>Quia resurgent ad tormenta Gehennae, hinc vita eorum potius
mors dicenda est, quam vita.</q></note>
If this interpretation of the
words, <q>shall never die,</q> seem
to anyone strained, he may
take them in reference to the
death of the soul; but as there
is question in the context of
the raising of the <emph>body</emph> of
Lazarus, we consider the
opinion we have adopted more
probable. In these verses, then,
Jesus declares Himself the
resurrection and the life; the
resurrection of the <emph>dead</emph>, the
enduring life of the <emph>living</emph>. So
that verse 25 encourages
Martha to hope to have Lazarus
restored to her, and verse 26
warns her to look to herself, in
order that she may live for ever.
</p>

<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>

<anchor id='XI_27'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>27. Ait illi: Utique Domine,
ego credidi quia tu es Christus
Filius Dei vivi, qui in hunc
mundum venisti.</cell>
<cell>27. She saith to him: Yea,
Lord, I have believed that
thou art Christ the Son of the
living God, who art come into
this world.</cell></row>
<row><cell>28. Et cum haec dixisset,
abiit, et vocavit Mariam, sororem
suam silentio, dicens:
Magister ad est, et vocat te.</cell>
<cell>28. And when she had said
these things, she went, and
called her sister Mary secretly,
saying: The master is come
and calleth for thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>29. Illa ut audivit, surgit
cito, et venit ad eum.</cell>
<cell>29. She, as soon as she
heard <hi rend='italic'>this</hi>, riseth quickly and
cometh to him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>30. Nondum enim venerat
Iesus in castellum: sed erat
adhuc in illo loco ubi occurrerat
ei Martha.</cell>
<cell>30. For Jesus was not yet
come into the town; but he
was still in that place where
Martha had met him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>31. Iudaei ergo qui erant
cum ea in domo, et consolabantur
eam, cum vidissent
Mariam quia cito surrexit et
exiit, secuti sunt eam dicentes:
Quia vadit ad monumentum ut
ploret ibi.</cell>
<cell>31. The Jews therefore who
were with her in the house and
comforted her, when they saw
Mary that she rose up speedily
and went out, followed her,
saying: She goeth to the
grave, to weep there.</cell></row>
<row><cell>32. Maria ergo, cum venisset
ubi erat Iesus, videns eum,
cecidit ad pedes eius, et dicit
ei: Domine, si fuisses hic, non
esset mortuus frater meus.</cell>
<cell>32. When Mary therefore
was come where Jesus was,
seeing him, she fell down at
his feet, and saith to him:
Lord, if thou hadst been here,
my brother had not died.</cell></row></table>

<p>
27-32. To Christ's question,
if she believed what He had
said of Himself as the resurrection
and the life, she replies
that she believes<note place='foot'>The Perfect here has a Present signification. <q>Praesentis temporis
loco Perfectum adhibetur eatenus tantum quatenus verbo perfecti temporis
significatur actio quaepiam aut conditio, quae praeterito tempore incepta nunc
perdurat quaeque adeo sui initium tantum praeterito tempore habeat.</q>&mdash;Beel.,
<hi rend='italic'>Gr. Gram.</hi>, § 41, 4 a.</note> Him to be
the Messias, the Son of God,
and so she implicitly believes
in everything He teaches, even
though, as was probably the
case now, she did not quite understand.
Then she goes home,
and secretly calls her sister
Mary, who hurries out to meet
Jesus. The Jews, thinking
Mary went out to weep at the
tomb of Lazarus, follow her,
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
and she and they come to
the place where Jesus still
remained outside the village.
Mary repeats almost the exact
words which Martha had used
on meeting Jesus.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>33. Iesus ergo, ut vidit eam
plorantem, et Iudaeos qui
venerant cum ea, plorantes,
infremuit spiritu, et turbavit
seipsum.</cell>
<cell>33. Jesus therefore, when he
saw her weeping, and the
Jews that were come with her,
weeping, groaned in the spirit,
and troubled himself.</cell></row></table>

<p>
33. The word ἐνεβριμήσατο
which we translate <hi rend='bold'>groaned</hi>,
is far more expressive of indignation
than of grief. So Tolet.,
Beel., Trench, &amp;c. Christ's
indignation on the present
occasion was on account of
sin which brought death upon
Lazarus and the whole human
race, or rather perhaps on
account of the incredulity of
the Jews, which made this
miracle and the sorrow consequent
upon the death of
Lazarus necessary.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Troubled himself.</hi> These
words imply Christ's supreme
control over the passions of
His human nature.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>34. Et dixit: Ubi posuistis
eum? Dicunt ei: Domine,
veni, et vide.</cell>
<cell>34. And said: Where have
you laid him? They say to
him: Lord, come and see.</cell></row></table>

<p>
34. He knew well, but probably
wished to excite their
faith and hope by the question.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>35. Et lacrymatus est Iesus.</cell>
<cell>35. And Jesus wept.</cell></row></table>

<p>
35. Truly this is a touching
scene! The Lord of heaven
weeps over the grave of His
departed friend. In no other
part of the Gospels are the
human and Divine sides of
our Blessed Lord's character
more clearly brought out than
in this beautiful story of the
raising of Lazarus. Christ as
man weeps over him, whom
He is about as God to raise
from the dead.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>36. Dixerunt ergo Iudaei:
Ecce quomodo amabat eum.</cell>
<cell>36. The Jews therefore said:
Behold how he loved him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>37. Quidam autem ex ipsis
dixerunt: Non poterat hic, qui
aperuit oculos caeci nati, facere
ut hic non moreretur?</cell>
<cell>37. But some of them said:
Could not he that opened the
eyes of the man born blind,
have caused that this man
should not die?</cell></row>
<row><cell>38. Iesus ergo rursum fremens
in semetipso, venit ad
monumentum: erat autem
spelunca: et lapis superpositus
erat ei.</cell>
<cell>38. Jesus therefore again
groaning in himself, cometh
to the sepulchre: Now it was
a cave; and a stone was laid
over it.</cell></row></table>

<p>
38. Caves were the usual
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
family vaults of the Jews,
sometimes natural, sometimes
artificial and hollowed out of
a rock. See Gen. xxiii. 9;
Judith xvi. 24; Isai. xxii. 26;
John xix. 41.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>39. Ait Iesus: Tollite lapidem:
Dicit ei Martha, soror
eius qui mortuus fuerat: Domine,
iam foetet, quatriduanus
est enim.</cell>
<cell>39. Jesus saith: Take away
the stone. Martha, the sister
of him that was dead, saith to
him: Lord, by this time he
stinketh, for he is now of four
days.</cell></row></table>

<p>
39. Martha evidently imagined
that Jesus wished merely
to see her brother's corpse, and
she shudders at the thought of
its being exposed, now decomposing,
to the gaze of the
crowd. Her words and Christ's
reply, both show that she did
not <emph>now</emph> hope that Jesus could
raise her brother who was four
days dead.
</p>

<p>
A little before indeed she
had hoped for even this (verse
22); but now her faith began
to waver. <q>Habuit ergo
alternantes motus gratiae et
naturae, fidei et diffidentiae,
spei et desperationis de resurrectione
Lazari</q> (A Lap.).
</p>

<p>
From this verse we learn
that Lazarus was four days
dead; from verse 17 that he
was four days in the grave;
hence he must have been buried
on the day he died.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>40. Dicit ei Iesus: Nonne
dixi tibi quoniam si credideris,
videbis gloriam Dei?</cell>
<cell>40. Jesus saith to her: Did
not I say to thee, that if thou
believe, thou shalt see the
glory of God?</cell></row></table>

<p>
40. Christ's reply shows that
Martha's faith was now imperfect.
<hi rend='bold'>Did I not say to thee,
that if thou believe, thou
shalt see the glory of God?</hi>
Where He had said these exact
words to her is not recorded,
but the reference is probably
to what was said to the messenger
and reported by him
to the sisters of Lazarus (4), or
to the discourse with Martha,
epitomized above (23-26). By
the <q>glory of God</q> is meant
the glorious power of God.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>41. Tulerunt ergo lapidem:
Iesus autem elevatis sursum
oculis, dixit: Pater gratias ago
tibi quoniam audisti me:</cell>
<cell>41. They took therefore the
stone away. And Jesus lifting
up his eyes said: Father, I
give thee thanks that thou hast
heard me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
41. The stone that closed
the mouth of the cave was
removed, and Jesus raising His
eyes to heaven returns thanks
to His Father. As man He
returns thanks for the power
which He was about to manifest;
and He does so before
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
the event, so confident is He
that Lazarus will start at His
call. Jesus did not enter the
sepulchre; if He had entered,
our Evangelist who records all
the circumstances so minutely
would have mentioned the fact.
It is hardly necessary to remark
upon the absurd explanation
of Paulus and Gabler, to
the effect that Jesus alone
looked into the sepulchre, or
alone entered it, and to His
surprise found Lazarus alive;
that He then returned thanks
to God that Lazarus was not
dead, and told Lazarus to come
out of the sepulchre. For that
Christ did not enter the sepulchre,
is clear from what has
been already stated, as well
as from His words, <q>Come
forth,</q> which imply that He
was outside. That He alone
looked into the sepulchre, is
incredible; for we may be sure
that the natural curiosity of
the crowd assembled, led many
of them to look into the sepulchre.
Is it likely too, that if
Jesus on looking into the
sepulchre saw His friend alive,
He would coolly begin to return
thanks to God, and then quietly
tell Lazarus to come out? He
should have been more than
man, which our adversaries
will not admit Him to have
been, to preserve such coolness
in such circumstances.
</p>

<anchor id='XI_42'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>42. Ego autem sciebam quia
semper me audis: sed propter
populum qui circumstat, dixi,
ut credant quia tu me misisti.</cell>
<cell>42. And I knew that thou
hearest me always, but because
of the people who stand about
have I said it; that they may
believe that thou hast sent me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
42. Christ's thanks to the
Father on this occasion must
not lead us to suppose that
some unexpected favour had
been conferred by the Father
upon Him. He knew well
that on account of the conformity
of His will with that
of His Father, He could ask
nothing that His Father
could refuse; but He returns
thanks now, as He Himself
tells us, in order that
the people present might believe
that the Father had sent
Him. In other words, Jesus
wished to make the raising
of Lazarus a clear proof of
His Divinity, by thus calling
God to witness to the miracle
before it was wrought. Unquestionably
the raising of
Lazarus from the dead is a
most powerful proof of the
Divinity of Christ. It was a
manifest and public miracle
performed in the presence of a
whole crowd of witnesses
(see <ref target='XI_19'>19</ref>, <ref target='XI_27'>31</ref>, <ref target='XI_43'>45</ref>), performed to
prove that Christ had come
from the Father (verse <ref target='XI_42'>42</ref>);
that He was the resurrection
and the life (verses <ref target='XI_25'>25, 26</ref>);
that He was the Son of God
(verse <ref target='XI_4'>4</ref>); that, in fact, He
was all that which, a short
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
time previously, and in Jerusalem
itself, He had claimed
to be, namely, the Lord of life,
one with the Father (x. <ref target='X_28'>28</ref>, <ref target='X_29'>30</ref>).
Such a miracle in such circumstances
God could never have
permitted, had Christ not been
in truth all that He claimed to
be.
</p>

<p>
Rationalists have tried in
various ways to explain away
this stupendous miracle. Some
say that the story is a pure
concoction of St. John, else it
would have been narrated by
some other Evangelist. Others,
that the death of Lazarus was
merely feigned, a pious ruse
in which Christ and Lazarus,
as well as Martha and Mary
were accomplices, with the
object of inducing the people
to accept and follow the teachings
of Christ.
</p>

<p>
But we need hardly point
out how absurd it is to suppose,
that St. John would attempt,
fifty years after the Synoptic
Evangelists, to invent and put
forward such a minute account
of an extraordinary event till
then unheard-of by the Jews.
That the other Evangelists
make no mention of this
stupendous miracle is remarkable,
but may be accounted
for by the fact that prior to
the history of the Passion, they
confine their narratives almost
entirely to what Christ said and
did in Galilee. Hence they do
not mention the healing of
the man who had been ill for
thirty-eight years (John <ref target='V_5'>v. 5-9</ref>),
nor of the man born blind
(John <ref target='Chapter_IX'>ix.</ref>), nor, for the same
reason, the raising of Lazarus,
all these miracles having
occurred in Judea.
</p>

<p>
The second theory mentioned
above hardly requires
refutation. Even His Jewish
enemies never accused Christ
of fraud or deception; and in
this particular instance the
Jews, many of whom were
hostile to Jesus (verse 46),
and no doubt investigated the
miracle, had not the slightest
suspicion of fraud. So certain
were all, even the Pharisees,
that the miracle was genuine,
that without attempting to
deny it, they merely bethink
themselves what they will do
with Jesus (verses 47, 48).
</p>

<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>

<anchor id='XI_43'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>43. Haec cum dixisset, voce
magna clamavit: Lazare veni
foras.</cell>
<cell>43. When he had said these
things, he cried with a loud
voice: Lazarus, come forth.</cell></row>
<row><cell>44. Et statim prodiit qui
fuerat mortuus, ligatus pedes
et manus institis, et facies illius
sudario erat ligata. Dixit eis
Iesus: Solvite eum, et sinite
abire.</cell>
<cell>44. And presently he that
had been dead came forth,
bound feet and hands with
winding-bands, and his face
was bound about with a
napkin. Jesus said to them:
Loose him and let him go.</cell></row>
<row><cell>45. Multi ergo ex Iudaeis
qui venerant ad Mariam et
Martham; et viderant quae
fecit Iesus, crediderunt in eum.</cell>
<cell>45. Many therefore of the
Jews who were come to Mary
and Martha, and had seen the
things that Jesus did, believed
in him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>46. Quidam autem ex ipsis
abierunt ad pharisaeos, et
dixerunt eis quae fecit Iesus.</cell>
<cell>46. But some of them went
to the Pharisees, and told
them the things that Jesus had
done.</cell></row>
<row><cell>47. Collegerunt ergo pontifices
et pharisaei concilium et
dicebant: Quid facimus, quia
hic homo multa signa facit?</cell>
<cell>47. The chief priests therefore
and the Pharisees gathered
a council, and said: What do
we, for this man doth many
miracles?</cell></row>
<row><cell>48. Si dimittimus eum sic,
omnes credent in eum: et
venient Romani, et tollent nostrum
locum, et gentem.</cell>
<cell>48. If we let him alone so,
all will believe in him, and the
Romans will come, and take
away our place and nation.</cell></row></table>

<p>
48. They dreaded lest the
Romans, fearing He should
become king, should come and
destroy their temple and nation.
</p>

<anchor id='XI_49'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>49. Unus autem ex ipsis
Caiphas nomine, cum esset
pontifex anni illius, dixit eis:
Vos nescitis quidquam.</cell>
<cell>49. But one of them named
Caiphas, being the high-priest
that year, said to them: You
know nothing.</cell></row>
<row><cell>50. Nec cogitatis quia expedit
vobis ut unus moriatur
homo pro populo, et non tota
gens pereat.</cell>
<cell>50. Neither do you consider
that it is expedient for you
that one man should die for
the people, and that the whole
nation perish not.</cell></row>
<row><cell>51. Hoc autem a semetipso
non dixit: sed cum esset pontifex
anni illius, prophetavit
quod Iesus moriturus erat pro
gente.</cell>
<cell>51. And this he spoke not
of himself: but being the
high-priest of that year, he
prophesied that Jesus should
die for the nation.</cell></row>
<row><cell>52. Et non tantum pro gente,
sed ut filios Dei, qui erant
dispersi, congregaret in unum.</cell>
<cell>52. And not only for the
nation, but to gather together
in one the children of God,
that were dispersed.</cell></row></table>

<p>
49-52. Then Caiphas, the
High-priest for that year said:
<hi rend='bold'>You know nothing</hi>, &amp;c.
Caiphas meant that Jesus
should be got rid of to save
the Jewish nation from incurring
the anger of the Romans.
The Holy Ghost, however, as
St. John tells us, signified
through Caiphas (as an unconscious
instrument) that the
death of Jesus was necessary
for the eternal salvation of the
Jewish people, and of all to be
called to the faith who were
scattered then or since among
the Gentiles. Caiphas was
unaware of the solemn sense
of the words which he enunciated;
so that the Holy Ghost
speaking through a prophet
may sometimes mean one
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
thing, the Prophet himself
something quite different. It
is the common opinion, too,
that even the <emph>inspired writers</emph>
did not always understand
the meaning of what they
wrote, and in such cases the
sense of Scripture is, of course,
that which was intended by
the Holy Ghost.
</p>

<p>
Caiphas, whom on this occasion
the Holy Ghost employed
to declare the necessity for
man of the vicarious sacrifice
of Christ, was the Jewish
High-priest at the time (<ref target='XI_49'>xi. 49</ref>,
<ref target='XVIII_13'>xviii. 13</ref>). His father-in-law,
Annas, is called High-priest
by St. Luke (Luke iii. 2; Acts
iv. 6), from which some, as
Beelen, conclude, that each
filled the office of High-priest
every alternate year. For
this view, however, there is
no historical evidence, and it
seems more probable that
Annas is called High-priest by
St. Luke, not because he was
then discharging the duties of
the successor of Aaron, but
because, having been High-priest,
and unlawfully deposed
(<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 14) by Valerius Gratus,
the Roman Governor of Judea,
he was still regarded by the
Jews as the lawful High-priest.<note place='foot'>By its original institution, the office of High-priest was to be held for life;
but we know from Josephus that the High-priest was frequently deposed by
the Romans. <q>Praetor in Judaeam missus est Valerius Gratus; qui Ananum
Pontificatu privavit, et eum Ismaeli Phabi filio tribuit, atque hunc non multo
post abdicavit, et id munus Eleazaro Anani Pontificis filio commisit. Uno
autem anno post sacerdotium huic ademtum Simoni Camithi filio tradidit;
cumque is dignitatem non ultra anni spatium tenuisset, Josephus, cui etiam
Caiphae nomen fuit, ei successit.</q>&mdash;Josephus, <hi rend='italic'>Antiq.</hi>, xviii. 2, 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
Or it may be that, as <hi rend='italic'>President
of the Sanhedrim</hi>, a position
which Annas filled, after
he had been deposed from that
of High-priest, he is styled
ἀρχιερεύς by St. Luke. This
latter is the view of Cornely,
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
iii., § 76, n. 18. See Acts vii.
1; ix. 1, 2.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>53. Ab illo ergo die cogitaverunt
ut interficerent eum.</cell>
<cell>53. From that day therefore
they devised to put him to
death.</cell></row></table>

<p>
53. Thus the raising of
Lazarus, which was the occasion
of Caiphas' suggestion, had
an important influence upon the
final determination of the Jews
to put Christ to death. St.
John notes the growth of Jewish
hostility step by step: <ref target='V_16'>v. 16 ff.</ref>;
vii. <ref target='VII_32'>32</ref>, <ref target='VII_45'>45</ref> ff.; <ref target='VIII_45'>viii. 45 ff.</ref>; <ref target='VIII_59'>viii.
59</ref>; <ref target='IX_22'>ix. 22</ref>; <ref target='X_39'>x. 39</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>54. Iesus ergo iam non in
palam ambulabat apud Iudaeos,
sed abiit in regionem
iuxta desertum, in civitatem
quae dicitur Ephrem, et ibi
morabatur cum discipulis suis.</cell>
<cell>54. Wherefore Jesus walked
no more openly among the
Jews, but he went into a
country near the desert, unto
a city that is called Ephrem,
and there he abode with his
disciples.</cell></row></table>

<p>
54. The city of Ephrem (Gr.
ἐφαίμ) is probably the same
to which Josephus refers (<hi rend='italic'>Bell.
Jud.</hi>, iv. 9, 9) as situated in the
mountains of Judea. The city
probably occupied the site of
the modern et-Taiyibeh, about
14 miles N.E. of Jerusalem, in
the mountainous district lying
between the central towns and
the Jordan. See Smith's <hi rend='italic'>B. D.</hi>
</p>

<anchor id='XI_55'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>55. Proximum autem erat
pascha Iudaeorum: et ascenderunt
multi Ierosolymam de
regione ante pascha, ut sanctificarent
seipsos.</cell>
<cell>55. And the pasch of the
Jews was at hand: and many
from the country went up to
Jerusalem before the pasch, to
purify themselves.</cell></row></table>

<p>
55. This was the fourth and
last Pasch of our Lord's public
life, and during it He was put
to death. <hi rend='bold'>To purify themselves</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, from any legal
uncleanness, in order that they
might be able to keep the
Passover. See Numb. ix. 10;
2 Paral. xxx. 17; Acts xxi. 24-56.
In any case where sacrifice
was required in the process
of purification, it was
necessary to go to Jerusalem,
because there only could sacrifice
be offered.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>56. Quaerebant ergo Iesum:
et colloquebantur ad invicem,
in templo stantes: Quid
putatis, quia non venit ad diem
festum? Dederant autem pontifices
et pharisaei mandatum,
ut si quis cognoverit ubi sit,
indicet, ut apprehendant eum.</cell>
<cell>56. They sought therefore
for Jesus; and they discoursed
one with another, standing in
the temple: What think you,
that he is not come to the
festival day? And the chief
priests and the Pharisees had
given a commandment, that
if any man knew where he
was, he should tell, that they
might apprehend him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
56. Whether those who
sought Jesus were His friends
or enemies, is disputed. But
from what follows in this verse,
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
we believe they were His
enemies, who were looking for
Him, in order to deliver Him
up to the Sanhedrim.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>What think you, that he
is not come to the festival
day?</hi> We much prefer to understand
here two questions&mdash;<hi rend='bold'>What
think you?</hi> Do you
think <hi rend='bold'>that he will not come
to the feast</hi>? For our
Rhemish translation gives ὅτι
οὐ μη ἔλθῃ a past, whereas it
ought to have a future sense.
Hence the Revised Version
translates with two questions.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XII.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-8. <hi rend='bold'>The Supper in Bethania six days before the Pasch.</hi>
</p>

<p>
9-11. <hi rend='bold'>The chief priests think of killing Lazarus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
12-19. <hi rend='bold'>On the day after the supper Christ enters Jerusalem in triumph,
to the disgust of the Pharisees.</hi>
</p>

<p>
20-22. <hi rend='bold'>Some Gentile Proselytes wish to see Him.</hi>
</p>

<p>
23-33. <hi rend='bold'>Christ (at the temple) foretells the near approach of His passion,
and a voice from heaven is heard.</hi>
</p>

<p>
34-36. <hi rend='bold'>He continues to refer to His approaching death, and exhorts
the people to faith.</hi>
</p>

<p>
37-43. <hi rend='bold'>Yet though they had witnessed many miracles, most of them
refused to believe, as the prophets had foretold.</hi>
</p>

<p>
44-50. <hi rend='bold'>Christ's testimony regarding the object of the Incarnation, and
the necessity of faith in Him.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<anchor id='XII_1'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Iesus ergo ante sex dies
paschae venit Bethaniam, ubi
Lazarus fuerat mortuus, quem
suscitavit Iesus.</cell>
<cell>1. Jesus therefore six days
before the pasch came to
Bethania, where Lazarus had
been dead, whom Jesus raised
to life.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. Maldonatus connects with
<ref target='XI_55'>xi. 55</ref>: since the Pasch was
near, Jesus on His way to Jerusalem
to celebrate it, came to
Bethania. <hi rend='bold'>Six days before
the pasch.</hi> This peculiar
Greek construction would be
better rendered in Latin; <q>sex
diebus ante pascha.</q> We have
now entered upon the last week
of our Divine Lord's mortal life,
but there is a diversity of opinion
regarding the exact day here
indicated. The principal views
regarding the days of our
Lord's arrival at Bethania, of
the supper there, and of the
triumphant entry into Jerusalem,
are:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(1) Arrival at Bethania on
Friday; the supper (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) on the
same evening, or (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) according
to others, on Saturday evening;
the triumphal entry on Sunday.
</p>

<p>
(2) Arrival at Bethania on
Saturday evening; the supper
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
on the same evening; the
entry into Jerusalem (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) on
Sunday, or (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) according to
others, on Monday.
</p>

<p>
(3) Arrival on Sunday;
supper on the same evening;
the entry into Jerusalem on
Monday.
</p>

<anchor id='XII_2'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. Fecerunt autem ei coenam
ibi: et Martha ministrabat,
Lazarus vero, unus erat ex
discumbentibus cum eo.</cell>
<cell>2. And they made him a
supper there: and Martha
served, but Lazarus was one
of them that were at table with
him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. In Bethania then (in the
house of Simon the leper, as we
learn from Matt. xxvi. 6;
Mark xiv. 3) a supper was prepared
for Jesus, at which
Lazarus was present and
Martha served. We take it as
certain that Matthew (xxvi.
6-13) and Mark (xiv. 3-9) refer
to the same unction of Christ
which is recorded by St. John
in the following verses here.
If not, we should have to suppose
that the same murmuring
for the same cause in the same
circumstances took place a
second time within four days,
though reprehended by Christ
on the first occasion it occurred.
That SS. Matthew and Mark
seem to refer to an occasion
<emph>two</emph> days before the Pasch
(Matt. xxvi. 2; Mark xiv. 1),
while St. John refers to an
occasion <emph>six</emph> days before, is
readily explained. The two
Synoptic Evangelists record
this anointing of Jesus by Mary
out of its place, and in connection
with the treachery of
Judas, because it was it that
finally determined Judas to
betray our Lord.<note place='foot'><q>Dubium non est, quin Matthaeus et Marcus, ut explicent quo modo
Judas ad traditionem pervenerit, narrationem hanc parenthetico modo illis,
quae de Pharisaeorum et sacerdotum consilio tradunt, inseruerint.</q>&mdash;Corn.,
iii., p. 296, note n. So too Coleridge, <hi rend='italic'>Life of our Life</hi>, vol. ii., p. 46: <q>The
two earlier Evangelists give their accounts of that supper out of its place, and
in immediate connection with the Passion of our Lord, for the obvious reason
that it was an incident of that supper, which finally determined Judas to betray
our Lord to His enemies, and thus to bring about His death.</q></note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Maria ergo accepit libram
unguenti nardi pistici, pretiosi,
et unxit pedes Iesu, et extersit
pedes eius capillis suis: et
domus impleta est ex odore
unguenti.</cell>
<cell>3. Mary therefore took a
pound of ointment of right
spikenard, of great price, and
anointed the feet of Jesus,
and wiped his feet with her
hair: and the house was filled
with the odour of the ointment.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. When we bear in mind the
prominence given to Lazarus,
Martha, and Mary in the preceding
chapter, and find two of
the three mentioned in verse 2
here, it is certain that the Mary
mentioned here, in verse 3, can
be no other than she who was
sister to Martha and Lazarus.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Mary therefore took a
pound of ointment of right
spikenard.</hi> We learn from
Matthew and Mark that the
ointment was contained in an
alabaster box. Alabaster is a
species of stone resembling
marble, and derives its name
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
from Alabastron, a town in
Egypt, near which it was found
in large quantities. The term
<q>alabaster box</q> came in time
to be applied to any box for
holding perfumes.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Spikenard</hi>, or nard, is a
famous aromatic substance
obtained from an eastern
plant of the same name. It is
said in our Rhemish Version
to be <hi rend='bold'>right</hi> spikenard. The
Greek adjective thus translated
is πιστικῆς, which may
mean <emph>genuine</emph>, from πίστις; or
<emph>liquid</emph>, from πίστος (πίνω, to
drink); or, as St. Augustine
says, the nard may have been
so called from the place in
which it was obtained. St.
John tells us that Mary
anointed the <emph>feet</emph> of our Lord,
who, according to the Jewish
custom, would be reclining on
His left side upon a couch,
with His feet stretching out
behind. The first two Evangelists
mention only the unction
of our Lord's head, so that St.
John supplements their account.
The fact that the odour of the
ointment filled the house, is
mentioned as a proof of its
excellence. Pliny (xiii. 3) refers
to such unctions among
the Romans: <q>Vidimus etiam
vestigia pedum tingi.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Dixit ergo unus ex discipulis
eius, Iudas Iscariotes,
qui erat eum traditurus:</cell>
<cell>4. Then one of his disciples,
Judas Iscariot, he that was
about to betray him, said:</cell></row>
<row><cell>5. Quare hoc unguentum non
veniit trecentis denariis, et
datum est egenis?</cell>
<cell>5. Why was not this ointment
sold for three hundred
pence, and given to the poor?</cell></row></table>

<p>
4, 5. From SS. Matt. and
Mark, it would seem that at
least two of the disciples must
have murmured, for St. Matt.
says: <q>And the disciples seeing
it, had indignation;</q> and
St. Mark: <q>Now there were
some that had indignation
within themselves, and said:
Why was this waste of the
ointment made?</q> We may
admit, then, that some of the
others joined Judas in murmuring,
but probably from a
different motive; or, we may
hold, with some commentators,
that the plural is used indefinitely
for the singular.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Judas Iscariot</hi> (Gr. Judas
Iscariot, <hi rend='italic'>son of Simon</hi>: see
notes on <ref target='VI_72'>vi. 72</ref>) spoke out, asking
why this ointment was not
sold at 300 pence, and the price
given to the poor? We discussed
above on <ref target='VI_7'>vi. 7</ref>, the
value of the Roman silver
penny at this time current in
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
Palestine, from which it appears
that this box of ointment
was thought to be worth nearly
£10 of our money.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Dixit autem hoc, non quia
de egenis pertinebat ad eum,
sed quia fur erat, et loculos
habens, ea quae mittebantur
portabat.</cell>
<cell>6. Now he said this, not because
he cared for the poor;
but because he was a thief, and
having the purse, carried the
things that were put therein.</cell></row></table>

<p>
6. St. John here declares the
motive of Judas. It was not
love for the poor, as he pretended,
but because, being
purse-bearer, for our Lord and
the disciples, he was always
anxious to receive money, that
he might have an opportunity
of filching some of it for
himself. Whether with our
Rhemish Version we give
ἐβάσταζεν the meaning of
<q>carried,</q> or, as others prefer,
<q>made away with,</q> at all
events, it is plain from the
verse, in which Judas is declared
a thief, that he sometimes
appropriated to his own
uses money from the common
purse. In his case, too, the
saying was true: <q>Nemo repente
fit turpissimus.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Dixit ergo Iesus: Sinite
illam ut in diem sepulturae
meae servet illud.</cell>
<cell>7. Jesus therefore said: Let
her alone, that she may keep it
against the day of my burial.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. There is a difference of
reading in this verse. Many
ancient authorities read: <hi rend='bold'>She
has kept it</hi> (τετήρηκεν)
<hi rend='bold'>against the day of my
burial</hi>; and the meaning of
this reading is plain. The
more probable<note place='foot'>So Lachm., Tisch., Treg., West &amp; Hort. The R. V. has: Suffer her to
keep it against the day of my burying, and in margin: Let her alone; it was
that she might keep it.</note> Greek reading,
however, is: <q><hi rend='italic'>That she might
keep it</hi> (ἱνα ... τηρήσῃ)
<hi rend='italic'>against the day of My burial</hi>.</q>
In this reading we take our
Lord's reply to mean: Let
her alone: it was not sold
(Judas had asked: Why was it
not sold?) in order that she
might keep it against the day
of My burial. Thus we would
read <q>servaret</q> instead of
<q>servet</q> in the Vulgate; and
we take <q>ut</q> to depend not
on <q>sinite,</q> but on some
words such as <q>non veniit</q>
(it was not sold) understood.
St. John's report of Christ's
words agrees substantially
with that of St. Mark, who
represents our Lord as saying:
<q>She is come beforehand to
anoint My body for the burial</q>
(Mark xiv. 8); and both accounts,
as well as that of St.
Matt. (xxvi. 12), <q>She hath
done it for My burial,</q> signify
that our Lord's death was so
close at hand that this unction
might be regarded as a preparation
for His burial; and
hence Mary was not to be
blamed, inasmuch as such
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
honours were usually paid to
bodies before burial.
</p>

<p>
Immediately after their account
of this unction, SS.
Matt. and Mark narrate the
compact of Judas with the
Jews to betray Jesus for thirty
pieces of silver; so that it is
extremely probable that it was
spite at losing the price of the
ointment used on this occasion
that finally determined Judas
to betray our Lord.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>8. Pauperes enim semper
habetis vobiscum: me autem
non semper habetis.</cell>
<cell>8. For the poor you have
always with you; but me you
have not always.</cell></row></table>

<p>
8. <hi rend='bold'>But me you have not
always.</hi> Christ as God is, no
doubt, everywhere, even now;
and even as man He is still upon
our altars in the Blessed Sacrament;
but He is no longer
with us in a mortal body
capable of deriving sensible
pleasure and comfort from such
ministrations as those of Mary
upon this occasion.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>9. Cognovit ergo turba multa
ex Iudaeis quia illic est: et
venerunt, non propter Iesum
tantum, sed ut Lazarum viderent,
quem suscitavit a mortuis.</cell>
<cell>9. A great multitude therefore
of the Jews knew that he
was there: and they came, not
for Jesus' sake only, but that
they might see Lazarus, whom
he had raised from the dead.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Cogitaverunt autem principes
sacerdotum ut et Lazarum
interficerent.</cell>
<cell>10. But the chief priests
thought to kill Lazarus also:</cell></row>
<row><cell>11. Quia multi propter illum
abibant ex Iudaeis, et credebant
in Iesum.</cell>
<cell>11. Because many of the
Jews by reason of him went
away, and believed in Jesus.</cell></row></table>

<p>
9-11. A great multitude, on
learning that Christ was in
Bethania, flocked out to see the
wonder-worker, and Lazarus
whom He had raised from the
dead; and so many were being
converted by that miracle, that
the chief priests thought of
putting Lazarus to death, that
they might thus get rid of a
living and manifest proof of
the almighty power of Jesus.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. In crastinum autem turba
multa, quae venerat ad diem
festum, cum audissent quia
venit Iesus Ierosolymam.</cell>
<cell>12. And on the next day a
great multitude, that was come
to the festival day, when they
had heard that Jesus was
coming to Jerusalem,</cell></row></table>

<p>
12. On the day after the
supper, which we take to
have been Sunday or Monday,
that is, the first or
second day of the Jewish
week, a great multitude came
to meet our Lord and escort
Him into Jerusalem. Hundreds
of thousands always flocked to
Jerusalem for the Pasch, and
though the feast was still some
days off, a great number had
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
already arrived. Doubtless
many of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem were also among
the crowd on this occasion.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>13. Acceperunt ramos palmarum,
et processerunt obviam
ei, et clamabant: Hosanna,
benedictus qui venit in nomine
Domini, rex Israel.</cell>
<cell>13. Took branches of palm-trees,
and went forth to meet
him, and cried: Hosanna,
blessed is he that cometh in
the name of the Lord, the king
of Israel.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. Carrying palm branches,
with shouts of joy and triumph,
they hailed Jesus as the Messias,
and King of Israel; in
the words of the great Paschal
chant (Ps. cxvii. 26), <hi rend='bold'>Hosanna</hi>
(הושׂענא, which is contracted
for הושׂיעה נא) means: <emph>pray</emph>,
<emph>save</emph>, or: <emph>save, I beseech</emph>. It
may be taken here as a prayer
to Jesus to save them, or rather
as a prayer to God to save and
bless their Messias. Or it may
be that it was used as an
expression of joy without attention
to its literal meaning, as
the expressions <q>vivat,</q> <q>vive
le roi,</q> and the like, are sometimes
used at the present day.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Et invenit Iesus asellum,
et sedit super eum, sicut scriptum
est:</cell>
<cell>14. And Jesus found a young
ass, and sat upon it, as it is
written:</cell></row></table>

<p>
14. From the Synoptic Evangelists
we learn that Jesus sent
His disciples telling them where
they should find the colt, and
St. Matthew tells us that they
brought the colt and its mother,
and spread their garments upon
both (ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν, Matt. xxi. 7).
They spread their garments
upon both, because they did
not know upon which He
would choose to sit. And
St. Matthew adds that Jesus
sat <emph>upon them</emph> (ἑπάνω αὐτῶν);
that is, as we take it, upon
the garments that had been
spread upon the colt. In this
way the accounts of the four
Evangelists are reconciled.
</p>

<p>
Another difficulty occurs
here, if we compare the
parallel passage of St. Luke
(xix. 29). For, whereas St.
John's account naturally leads
us to suppose that the ass's
colt was procured on the way
<emph>between</emph> Bethania, where Christ
had supped on the preceding
night (xii. <ref target='XII_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='XII_2'>2</ref>) and Jerusalem,
St. Luke, on the other hand,
says: <q>And it came to pass
<emph>when He was come nigh to
Bethphage and Bethania</emph>, unto
the mount called Olivet, He
sent two of His disciples, saying,
Go into the town which
is over against you, at your
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
entering into which you shall
find the colt of an ass tied,</q>
&amp;c. We have searched in
vain for a satisfactory solution
of this difficulty. If the words
of St. Luke are to be taken
strictly as meaning that Christ
was not merely near to, but
<emph>approaching</emph> Bethania, then we
would hold that on this morning,
before the procession
started, He had retired from
Bethania eastward, and therefore
farther away from Jerusalem,
and was now again
approaching the village on
His way to the Holy City.
There is nothing improbable in
this supposition, for Christ did
many things which the Evangelists
have not recorded
(John <ref target='XXI_24'>xxi. 25</ref>), and it enables
us to reconcile two accounts,
which are not easily reconciled
otherwise.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>15. Noli timere filia Sion:
ecce rex tuus venit sedens
super pullum asinae.</cell>
<cell>15. <hi rend='italic'>Fear not, daughter of
Sion: behold, thy king cometh,
sitting on an ass's colt.</hi></cell></row></table>

<p>
15. St. Matthew (xxi. 4) says
that these things were done that
prophecy might be fulfilled;
that is, they were brought
about by God, not by the
disciples, who, as St. John
tells us in the next verse, were
ignorant that they were fulfilling
a prophecy. The whole quotation
here is substantially from
Zach. ix. 9: <q>Rejoice greatly
(<q>fear not,</q> of St. John) O
daughter of Sion; shout for
joy, O daughter of Jerusalem!
Behold thy King will come to
thee, the Just and Saviour:
He is poor and riding upon an
ass, and (even) upon a colt the
foal of an ass.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Haec non cognoverunt
discipuli eius primum: sed
quando glorificatus est Iesus,
tunc recordati sunt quia haec
erant scripta de eo, et haec
fecerunt ei.</cell>
<cell>16. These things his disciples
did not know at the first: but
when Jesus was glorified, then
they remembered that these
things were written of him, and
that they had done these things
to him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. The disciples did not
know at that time that prophecy
was being fulfilled; but when
the light of the Holy Ghost had
flooded their souls at the first
Pentecost (Acts ii. 4), then they
recognised in these things the
fulfilment of prophecy.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Testimonium ergo perhibebat
turba quae erat cum eo
quando Lazarum vocavit de
monumento, et suscitavit eum
a mortuis.</cell>
<cell>17. The multitude therefore
gave testimony, which was with
him when he called Lazarus out
of the grave, and raised him
from the dead.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17. <hi rend='bold'>When he called Lazarus
out of the grave.</hi> It is
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
doubtful, and authorities are
much divided, whether the
true reading here is <emph>when</emph> (ὅτε),
or <emph>that</emph> (ὅτι). In the former
reading, eye-witnesses of the
miracle now bore testimony of
it; in the latter, the crowd
that was now with Him having
heard and believed that the
miracle had been wrought, now
bore witness <emph>that</emph> Jesus had
raised Lazarus from the dead.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Propterea et obviam venit
ei turba, quia audierunt eum
fecisse hoc signum.</cell>
<cell>18. For which reason also
the people came to meet him:
because they heard that he had
done this miracle.</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. It was on account of
this miracle too that the crowd
had come out to meet Him.
We take <q>the multitude</q> in
this verse to be the same as
that referred to in the preceding
(ὁ ὄχλος); and what St. John
tells us is, that their coming
out to meet Him, and their
testimony regarding Him, both
proceeded from the fact that
He had raised Lazarus from
the dead.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Pharisaei ergo dixerunt
ad semetipsos: Videtis quia
nihil proficimus? ecce mundus
totus post eum abiit.</cell>
<cell>19. The Pharisees therefore
said among themselves: Do
you see that we prevail nothing?
behold, the whole
world is gone after him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. The jealousy of the Pharisees
is at once aroused, and,
as often happens in such circumstances,
they exaggerate,
saying that the whole world
had gone after Him.
</p>

<p>
Our Lord moved on towards
Jerusalem, riding upon the
ass,<note place='foot'>It is frequently mentioned as a proof of our Lord's humility that He condescended
in this hour of triumph to ride upon an ass; and the context in the
prophecy of Zachary quoted above seems to favour this view. Still there is
good reason for supposing that the ass was commonly used by nobles in the
East (see, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Judg. v. 10, x. 4; 3 Kings i. 33), and that for this reason,
Christ may have used it in the hour of His triumph.</note> between two enthusiastic
crowds (see Matt. xxi. 9;
Mark xi. 9). As He approached
the city, and shouts of joy and
thanksgiving rose from the
crowds which preceded and
followed, some Pharisees, as
we learn from St. Luke, bade
Jesus rebuke His disciples for
the words of homage they were
using. To whom He replied:
<q>I say to you, if these shall
hold their peace, the stones will
cry out</q> (Luke xix. 40). Then
when He had mounted the
summit of Olivet, and the city
and temple burst upon His
view, He wept, and <q>went on
to prophesy the destruction of
the city with a particularity of
detail, to the exactness of
which the subsequent history
bears wonderful testimony.</q>
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
(Coleridge, <hi rend='italic'>Life of our Life</hi>,
vol. ii., p. 187). See Luke
xix. 41-44.
</p>

<p>
When the procession entered
Jerusalem, the <q>whole city was
moved, saying, Who is this?</q>
And the people said, <q>This is
Jesus the Prophet from Nazareth
of Galilee</q> (Matt. xxi.
10, 11). As we learn from
St. Mark, Jesus went up to the
temple, and there the events
occurred which St. John records
down to verse 36.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Erant autem quidam gentiles,
ex his qui ascenderant ut
adorarent in die festo.</cell>
<cell>20. Now there were certain
gentiles among them who came
up to adore on the festival day.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21. Hi ergo accesserunt ad
Philippum, qui erat a Bethsaida
Galilaeae, et rogabant eum,
dicentes: Domine volumus
Iesum videre.</cell>
<cell>21. These therefore came to
Philip, who was of Bethsaida
of Galilee, and desired him,
saying: Sir, we would see
Jesus.</cell></row>
<row><cell>22. Venit Philippus, et dicit
Andreae: Andreas rursum et
Philippus dixerunt Iesu.</cell>
<cell>22. Philip cometh and telleth
Andrew. Again Andrew and
Philip told Jesus.</cell></row></table>

<p>
20-22. Some Gentiles, who
were probably proselytes, had
come to Jerusalem for the
Pasch, and they ask Philip that
they may see, that is, speak
with Jesus. Philip consults
his fellow-townsman, Andrew
(John <ref target='I_44'>i. 44</ref>), and they both
make known the request to
Jesus. Our Lord was probably
in the Court of the Jews,
into which the Gentiles could
not enter, so that their request
meant that Jesus should come
out into the Court of the
Gentiles. See above on <ref target='II_14'>ii. 14</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Iesus autem respondit eis,
dicens: Venit hora, ut clarificetur
Filius hominis.</cell>
<cell>23. But Jesus answered them
saying: The hour is come, that
the son of man should be glorified.</cell></row></table>

<p>
23. The Evangelist does not
tell us whether Jesus granted
an audience to these Gentiles,
but goes on to record His reply
to the disciples: <hi rend='bold'>The hour is
come that the son of man
should be glorified</hi>: <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the
hour of His death to be
followed by His glorious resurrection
and ascension by the
descent of the Holy Ghost, and
the call of the Gentiles.
</p>

<anchor id='XII_24'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Amen, amen dico vobis,
nisi granum frumenti cadens in
terram, mortuum fuerit,</cell>
<cell>24. Amen, amen, I say to
you, unless the grain of wheat
falling into the ground die;</cell></row>
<row><cell>25. Ipsum solum manet: si
autem mortuum fuerit, multum
fructum affert. Qui amat animam
suam, perdet eam: et qui
odit animam suam in hoc
mundo, in vitam aeternam custodit
eam.</cell>
<cell>25. Itself remaineth alone.
But if it die, it bringeth forth
much fruit. He that loveth
his life shall lose it: and he
that hateth his life in this
world, keepeth it unto life
eternal.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24, 25. In a beautiful comparison
our Lord points out
that as the grain of wheat dies
in order that it may fructify, so
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
in the providence of God His
death is necessary to His
triumph and His glory. And
applying this doctrine to His
disciples, He points out that
whoever loveth his life inordinately
here, shall lose it for
eternity, and he that hateth (a
Hebraism for <hi rend='italic'>loveth less</hi>) his
life in this world, keepeth it
unto life eternal.
</p>

<anchor id='XII_26'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>26. Si quis mihi ministrat,
me sequatur: et ubi sum ego,
illic et minister meus erit. Si
quis mihi ministraverit, honorificabit
eum Pater meus.</cell>
<cell>26. If any man minister to
me, let him follow me: and
where I am, there also shall
my minister be. If any man
minister to me, him will my
Father honour.</cell></row></table>

<p>
26. <hi rend='bold'>If any man minister to
me, let him follow me.</hi> This
exhortation to follow Christ in
despising this life for God's
sake, is addressed to all His
followers, who are to minister
to Him by the service of devout
lives; but it is applicable
in a special way to Priests, for
to them belongs the privilege of
the special ministry. To such
as imitate Him He gives the
glorious promise, that where
He is, that is, in the glory of
the Father, which as God He
then enjoyed, and which as
man He was to merit by His
passion, there also shall His
followers be.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>27. Nunc anima mea turbata
est. Et quid dicam? Pater,
salvifica me ex hac hora. Sed
propterea veni in horem hanc.</cell>
<cell>27. Now is my soul troubled.
And what shall I say? Father,
save me from this hour. But
for this cause I came unto this
hour.</cell></row></table>

<p>
27. The thought of His
approaching Passion now disturbed
His human soul, for
as He was true man, His
humanity naturally shuddered
at the suffering and death He
was about to undergo. Compare
Matt. xxvi. 38; Mark xiv.
34. Christ, of course, permitted
this fear to seize upon
Him, so that it was wholly
voluntary; and He manifested
it at this particular time, probably
lest His disciples should
be tempted to say that it was
easy for Him who was God to
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
exhort others to despise their
life and endure suffering. He
shows them, therefore, that
He dreads death like the rest
of men; and St. John records
the fact because of the Docetae,
who denied the reality of the
Incarnation, and consequently
of Christ's sufferings. See
above on <ref target='I_14'>i. 14</ref>, and <ref target='Intro_IX'>Introd. IX</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Father save me from this
hour.</hi> Some read this with a
note of interrogation after it,
as if the meaning were: Shall
I say to the Father to save Me
from this hour? But we may
understand the words as a
conditional prayer proceeding
from Christ's human will; conditional,
that is, upon his Father's
will to save Him from the
Passion which He was to
undergo, just as in St. Luke
xxii. 42: <q>Father, if Thou wilt,
remove this chalice from Me;
but not My will, but Thine be
done.</q> That such, indeed, is
the meaning here, is proved
by what follows, where Jesus
retracts this conditional prayer,
saying that it was for the very
purpose that He might suffer,
that He came unto this hour.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>28. Pater, clarifica nomen
tuum. Venit ergo vox de
coelo: Et clarificavi, et iterum
clarificabo.</cell>
<cell>28. Father, glorify thy name.
A voice therefore came from
heaven: I have both glorified
it, and will glorify it again.</cell></row></table>

<p>
28. In this verse, then, He
prays absolutely to the Father
to glorify His name by the
sufferings and death of the
Son. And a voice came from
the air, produced there by God
or an angel, saying: <hi rend='bold'>I have
both glorified (it), and will
glorify (it) again</hi>. The sense
of these words of the Father
is disputed. The Latin fathers
understand the sense to be;
I have glorified Thee from all
eternity, and will glorify Thee
again as God-man after Thy
ascension. In favour of this
view is the prayer of Christ:
<q>And now glorify Thou Me,
O Father, with Thyself, with
the glory which I had before
the world was, with Thee</q>
(John <ref target='XVII_5'>xvii. 5</ref>). The Greek
fathers, on the other hand,
all take the sense to be: I
have already glorified Thee by
many miracles, and will again
glorify Thee in the miracles to
be wrought at Thy death, resurrection,
and ascension, and
afterwards by Thy followers in
Thy name. It will be noted
that the fathers generally understand
the words of God
the Father in reference to the
glorification of Christ, whereas
Christ's prayer regarded the
glorification of the Father's
name. We feel convinced,
however, that the <emph>direct</emph> object
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
of glorification in both instances
is the Father's name. For when
Christ prays: <q>Glorify Thy
name,</q> and the Father
answers: <q>I have glorified,
and will again glorify,</q> obviously
the answer must refer to
the glorification of the Father's
name, for which Christ had
prayed. Since, however, the
glorification of the Father was
to be brought about by the
glorification of the Son; hence,
this too is indirectly referred to,
and our interpretation agrees
substantially with that of the
fathers.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>29. Turba ergo quae stabat
et audierat, dicebat tonitruum
esse factum. Alii dicebant:
Angelus ei locutus est.</cell>
<cell>29. The multitude therefore
that stood and heard, said that
it thundered. Others said, An
Angel spoke to him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>30. Respondit Iesus, et dixit:
Non propter me haec vox
venit, sed propter vos.</cell>
<cell>30. Jesus answered and said:
This voice came not because of
me, but for your sakes.</cell></row></table>

<p>
30. Jesus declares that the
voice from heaven was the
Father's testimony to Him,
given for their sakes, in order
that they might believe in Him.
</p>

<anchor id='XII_31'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>31. Nunc iudicium est mundi:
nunc princeps huius mundi
eiicietur foras.</cell>
<cell>31. Now is the judgment of
the world: now shall the prince
of this world be cast out.</cell></row></table>

<p>
31. <hi rend='bold'>Now is the judgment
of the world.</hi> There is a
difference of opinion as to
what judgment is here spoken
of; whether the judgment of
liberation of the world in
general, or the judgment of
condemnation of the <emph>wicked</emph>
world. In favour of the
former, it is argued&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>)
that since Satan was to be
cast out, or deprived of his
dominion over the world, therefore
the world was to be liberated;
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) that verse 32 declares
the effect of this judgment:
the world shall be liberated,
and as a consequence I shall
draw all things to Myself;
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) that the world to be judged
is that over which Satan had
ruled, and from which he was
now to be cast out. But before
the Incarnation he had held
sway over the whole world
(Rom. iii. 23, xi. 32; Gal. iii. 22).
Therefore, it is the whole world
that is to be judged, and hence
there must be question of
the judgment of liberation.
So St. Aug., Mald., A Lap.,
Tolet., Beel., Patriz.
</p>

<p>
In favour of the latter view,
which is held by St. Chrysostom
and most of the Greek fathers, it
is argued&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) that St. John always
uses κρίσις of the judgment
of condemnation; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) that the
world in the beginning of the
verse is the same whose prince
is to be deprived of his dominion;
that, therefore, it should stand
or fall with its prince; hence
since he is to be stripped of his
dominion, it is to be condemned;
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) that in the discourse after
the Last Supper, Christ always
means by the world, the <emph>wicked</emph>
world, opposed to Himself
(John xiv. <ref target='XIV_17'>17</ref>, <ref target='XIV_22'>22</ref>, <ref target='XIV_30'>30</ref>; xv. <ref target='XV_18'>18</ref>,
<ref target='XV_19'>19</ref>; xviii. <ref target='XVIII_9'>9</ref>, <ref target='XVIII_16'>16</ref>, <ref target='XVIII_25'>25</ref>); therefore,
also here, and hence there must
be question of the judgment of
condemnation.
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
<hi rend='bold'>The prince of this world</hi> is
plainly the devil. See also 2 Cor.
iv. 4; Eph. ii. 2, vi. 12. In the
Talmud the same title is given to
the prince of devils. By Christ's
death the devil was cast out:
that is, deprived of that almost
universal sway which he had
exercised over men before the
coming of Christ. <q>At nondum
diabolus e mundo ejectus videtur
esse, cum in eo adhuc
grassetur. Ejectus foras dicitur
non quod nunc in mundo non
sit, et in multis etiamnum dominetur;
sed quod, quantum in
Christo fuit, ejectus fuerit, ita
ut, si homines vellent, nihil
prorsus in ipsos haberet potestatis.
Homines illi postea
portam arcis aperuerunt, et
proditione quadam in suam
quisque domum admittit.
Itaque etiam nunc regnat et
operatur, sed in filios diffidentiae,
Eph. ii. 2</q> (Mald. on
this verse).
</p>

<anchor id='XII_32'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>32. Et ego si exaltatus fuero
a terra, omnia traham ad
meipsum:</cell>
<cell>32. And I, if I be lifted up
from the earth, will draw all
things to myself.</cell></row></table>

<p>
32. <hi rend='bold'>And I, if I be lifted up
from the earth.</hi> Christ here
predicted that after His death
on the cross (see next verse)
He should become a centre of
attraction, and draw all men
(πάντας is the more probable
reading, not πάντα), both Jews
and <emph>Gentiles</emph> to Himself. This
marvellous prophecy began to
be fulfilled in the centurion and
his companions (Matt. xxvii.
54), and the rest of the multitude
that witnessed the crucifixion
(Luke xxiii. 48), and is
daily receiving its fulfilment
still.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>33. Hoc autem dicebat, significans
qua morte esset moriturus.</cell>
<cell>33. (Now this he said, signifying
what death he should
die.)</cell></row></table>

<p>
33. St. John here gives us an
authentic interpretation.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>34. Respondit ei turba: Nos
audivimus ex lege quia Christus
manet in aeternum; et quomodo
tu dicis, Oportet exaltari
Filium hominis? Quis est iste
Filius hominis?</cell>
<cell>34. The multitude answered
him: We have heard out of
the law, that Christ abideth
for ever; and how sayest thou:
The son of man must be lifted
up? Who is this son of man?</cell></row></table>

<p>
34. The multitude understood
Jesus to speak of His
death, or at least of His withdrawal
from them, and object
that He cannot be the Messias,
who, as they understood the
Scriptures (the law is here put
for the whole Scriptures), was
to remain for ever. They quote
no single text, but probably
they had gathered this idea
from many passages; <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>,
Isai. ix. 6, 7; Ps. cix. 4; Dan.
vii. 13, 14, &amp;c. It is not unlikely
that they had the passage
of Daniel specially before their
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
minds, for there the power of
the <hi rend='italic'>Son of Man</hi> is described as
<q>an everlasting power that
shall not be taken away, and
His kingdom (a kingdom) that
shall not be destroyed.</q> Hence,
they argued, if Christ was to
die, He could not be the
Messias, but must be some
other <hi rend='italic'>Son of Man</hi> than he
spoken of by Daniel.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>35. Dixit ergo eis Iesus:
Adhuc modicum, lumen in
vobis est. Ambulate dum lucem
habetis, ut non vos tenebrae
comprehendant: et qui ambulat
in tenebris, nescit quo vadat.</cell>
<cell>35. Jesus therefore said to
them: Yet a little while, the
light is among you. Walk
whilst you have the light, that
the darkness overtake you not.
And he that walketh in darkness
knoweth not whither he
goeth.</cell></row></table>

<p>
35. Christ might have easily
replied, showing them from the
same Scriptures that the
Messias was to suffer and die
(see, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Isai. liii.; Dan. ix. 26);
but probably because He saw
that the motive of the multitude
in objecting was not to seek
light, but to disprove His claim
to be the Messias, He did not
vouchsafe a reply to their
objection, but went on to exhort
them to believe, for thus they
should find a solution of all
their difficulties.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Yet a little while</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, a
few days more, the light, which
is Himself, is to be among them.
He exhorts them, therefore, to
walk, that is, to believe, while
He is present among them, in
order that darkness, that is, the
time when He is gone from
among them, may not find them
still in their unbelief.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And</hi> (καί = γάρ) <hi rend='bold'>he that
walketh in darkness knoweth
not whither he goeth</hi>. Christ
does not mean to say that they
could not believe after His death;
but just as, though it is quite
possible to walk during the time
of darkness, still it is easier to
walk in daylight, so it was
easier for them to believe now,
when He, the Sun of Justice
was corporally present among
them, than it would be when
He had withdrawn His light.
We take, <q>darkness,</q> then,
with Mald., not of sin, nor of
unbelief, but, as opposed to the
light which is Christ, of the
time when Christ could be no
longer present among them,
after His death, as in verse
<ref target='IX_4'>ix. 4</ref>; xi. <ref target='XI_9'>9</ref>, <ref target='XI_10'>10</ref>.
</p>

<anchor id='XII_36'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>36. Dum lucem habetis, credite
in lucem, ut filii lucis sitis.
Haec locutus est Iesus: et
abiit, et abscondit se ab eis.</cell>
<cell>36. Whilst you have the light,
believe in the light, that
you may be the children of
light. These things Jesus
spoke, and he went away, and
hid himself from them.</cell></row></table>

<p>
36. He now explains what
He means by telling them to
walk. It is that they should
believe. <hi rend='bold'>That you may be</hi>
(become) <hi rend='bold'>the children of light</hi>.
The phrase <q>children of light</q>
is a Hebraism, meaning those
who are to possess the light,
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
who are destined for it. Compare
Luke xvi. 8; Eph. v. 8.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And he went away, and
hid himself from them.</hi>
SS. Matt. and Mark tell us
that He went to Bethania with
the twelve and remained there
(Matt. xxi. 17; Mark xi. 11).
</p>

<anchor id='XII_37'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>37. Cum autem tanta signa
fecisset coram eis, non credebant
in eum:</cell>
<cell>37. And whereas he had
done so many miracles before
them, they believed not in
him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>38. Ut sermo Isaiae prophetae
impleretur, quem dixit:
Domine, quis credidit auditui
nostro? et brachium Domini
cui revelatum est?</cell>
<cell>38. That the saying of Isaias
the prophet might be fulfilled,
which he said: <hi rend='italic'>Lord, who hath
believed our hearing? and to
whom hath the arm of the Lord
been revealed?</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>39. Propterea non poterant
credere, quia iterum dixit Isaias:</cell>
<cell>39. Therefore they could not
believe, because Isaias said
again.</cell></row>
<row><cell>40. Excaecavit oculos eorum,
et induravit cor eorum: ut non
videant oculis, et non intelligant
corde, et convertantur, et
sanem eos.</cell>
<cell>40. <hi rend='italic'>He hath blinded their eyes,
and hardened their heart,
that they should not see with
their eyes, nor understand with
their heart, and be converted,
and I should heal them.</hi></cell></row></table>

<p>
37-40. Before closing this
first part of the <emph>narrative</emph> portion
of the Gospel (see <ref target='Intro_IV'>Introd.
iv.</ref>), St. John pauses in the
history to note the hard-hearted
incredulity of the Jews, notwithstanding
the fact that Christ
had wrought <emph>so many</emph> miracles;
an incredulity, however, which
had been foretold by Isaias,
which, therefore, came to pass
now <emph>in order that</emph> (ἱνα)
the prediction of the Prophet
should be fulfilled (verses 37, 38);
and which came to pass necessarily
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitate consequente</foreign>),
because, as Isaias declared,
they no longer had the abundant
graces necessary in order
that they might believe (verses
39, 40). Thus the incredulity
of the Jews in our Lord's time
was <emph>necessary</emph> to the end that
prophecy might be fulfilled.
How then, we may ask, was
that incredulity culpable, if
those who were incredulous
were not free and able to
believe? The answer is, that
this incredulity was necessary
by a necessity consequent upon
the prediction of the inspired
Prophet, which prediction was
itself consequent upon God's
foreknowledge that the Jews
would, culpably and of their
own free will, remain incredulous.
God foresaw this incredulity,
predicted it, because
He foresaw it was to be; and,
of course, it came to pass, as
He had foreseen it would.
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
Hence, when God foresees,
or His Prophet predicts, the
commission of a certain sin,
that sin is infallibly, yet freely
committed. It is, as if we saw
a man walking across a plain;
he does so, not because we
see him, but we see him because
he walks. Similarly, in the
boundless plain of His eternal
present, God sees all things
that are to be, and they happen,
not because He sees them, but
He sees them because they are
to happen.
</p>

<p>
Note, in verse 38, that <hi rend='bold'>our
hearing</hi> means what has been
heard <emph>from</emph> us, for the preachers
of the Gospel are represented in
Isaias as complaining of the
small number of those who
listened to them. <hi rend='bold'>The arm of
the Lord</hi> is Christ, according
to several of the fathers; or
we may take it to mean the
power of the Lord in the work
of man's redemption.
</p>

<p>
Note, in verse 40, where the
prophecy is cited freely, after
neither the Hebrew nor the
Septuagint, that it is not meant
that God blinded any man
<emph>positively</emph>, but only negatively,
by the withdrawal of His more
abundant graces.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>41. Haec dixit Isaias, quando
vidit gloriam eius, et locutus
est de eo.</cell>
<cell>41. These things said Isaias
when he saw his glory, and
spoke of him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
41. See Isaias vi. 1, 9, 10,
where the Prophet says: <q>I
saw the Lord</q> (אדני = the
Supreme God), words which
are here referred by St. John
to the Prophet's having seen
Christ; therefore, according
to St. John, Christ is the
Supreme God.
</p>

<p>
It would also seem from this
verse that the Son of God
Himself, and not merely an
angel representing Him, appeared
to Isaias on that occasion.
It was the common
opinion of the fathers, though
denied by most of the scholastics,
that God sometimes appeared
in the O. T. apparitions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And spoke of him</hi>, rather,
<q>and he spoke of Him,</q> for
this clause does not depend
upon the preceding <q>when.</q>
It is a statement that it was
of Christ Isaias spoke the
words just quoted.
</p>

<anchor id='XII_42'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>42. Verumtamen et ex principibus
multi crediderunt in
eum: sed propter pharisaeos
non confitebantur, ut e synagoga
non eiicerentur:</cell>
<cell>42. However many of the
chief men also believed in him:
but because of the Pharisees
they did not confess <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, that
they might not be cast out of
the synagogue.</cell></row></table>

<p>
42. See above on <ref target='IX_22'>ix. 22</ref>.
</p>

<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>43. Dilexerunt enim gloriam
hominum magis quam gloriam
Dei.</cell>
<cell>43. For they loved the glory
of men, more than the glory
of God.</cell></row>
<row><cell>44. Iesus autem clamavit,
et dixit: Qui credit in me, non
credit in me sed in eum qui
misit me.</cell>
<cell>44. But Jesus cried, and
said: He that believeth in me,
doth not believe in me, but in
him that sent me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
44. These words of our Lord
recorded in the remainder of
this chapter seem to have been
spoken on a subsequent day of
Holy Week (see verse 36); but
on what precise day, it is difficult
to determine. <hi rend='bold'>Doth not
believe in me</hi> is the Hebrew
way of saying: doth not <emph>so
much</emph> believe in Me, as in Him
that sent Me. Compare Mark
ix. 36.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>45. Et qui videt me, videt
eum qui misit me.</cell>
<cell>45. And he that seeth me,
seeth him that sent me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
45. In these words Christ
declares His unity of nature
with the Father. <q>Sensus est
de visione corporali, non quod
Deus oculo corporeo videatur
immediate, et per se, sed mediante
humanitate, cui Divina
substantia Patris et Filii est
unita</q> (Tolet.).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>46. Ego lux in mundum
veni: ut omnis qui credit in
me, in tenebris non maneat.</cell>
<cell>46. I am come a light into
the world; that whosoever
believeth in me, may not
remain in darkness.</cell></row></table>

<p>
46. <hi rend='bold'>Darkness</hi> here means
unbelief and sin.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>47. Et si quis audierit verba
mea, et non custodierit, ego
non iudico eum, non enim veni
ut iudicem mundum, sed ut
salvificem mundum.</cell>
<cell>47. And if any man hear
my words and keep them not:
I do not judge him: for I
came not to judge the world,
but to save the world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
47. <hi rend='bold'>I do not judge him</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, I do not <emph>condemn</emph> him.
Compare <ref target='III_17'>iii. 17</ref>; viii. <ref target='VIII_15'>15</ref>, <ref target='VIII_50'>50</ref>.
At his <emph>first</emph> coming Christ did
not come to condemn, but to
save.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>48. Qui spernit me, et non
accipit verba mea, habet qui
iudicet eum: sermo quem locutus
sum, ille iudicabit eum in
novissimo die.</cell>
<cell>48. He that despiseth me,
and receiveth not my words,
hath one that judgeth him:
the word that I have spoken,
the same shall judge him in
the last day.</cell></row></table>

<p>
48. <hi rend='bold'>Hath one that judgeth
him</hi>; namely, the Father
(<ref target='VIII_50'>viii. 50</ref>). Hence the sense of
the verse is that he that despiseth
Me ... hath one that
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
judgeth him <emph>even now</emph>; and
moreover, on the last day My
words shall rise in judgment
against him.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>49. Quia ego ex meipso non
sum locutus, sed qui misit me
Pater, ipse mihi mandatum
dedit quid dicam, et quid
loquar.</cell>
<cell>49. For I have not spoken
of myself, but the Father who
sent me, he gave me commandment
what I should say,
and what I should speak.</cell></row></table>

<p>
49. This verse gives the
reason why the words of Christ
shall stand in judgment against
the unbeliever; because His
words were not merely His own,
uttered by His private authority,
but spoken by the command of
His Father, whom therefore
they despise, in despising Him.
In our view Christ here speaks
of Himself as man.
</p>

<p>
If <hi rend='bold'>say</hi> and <hi rend='bold'>speak</hi> are to
be distinguished, then <q>say</q>
(εἴπω) refers to the formal discourses,
<q>speak</q> (λαλήσω)
to the ordinary conversations;
so that in all His words Christ
had spoken to them the words
of God.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>50. Et scio quia mandatum
eius vita aeterna est. Quae
ergo ego loquor, sicut dixit
mihi Pater, sic loquor.</cell>
<cell>50. And I know that his
commandment is life everlasting.
The things therefore
that I speak; even as the
Father said unto me, so do I
speak.</cell></row></table>

<p>
50. To show them their folly,
and in the hope of yet inducing
them to believe, He tells
them He knows with certainty
that the command of the Father
(that is, what the Father had
commanded Him to say and do,
and hence, all His own words
and works) is the cause of
life eternal to mankind. Hence
their folly in not believing.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>The things therefore that
I speak; even as the Father
said unto me, so do I speak.</hi>
Thus He concludes, insisting
on the fact that He is the legate
of God (consubstantial with the
Father, verse 45), and as such
worthy to be believed.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIII.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-20. <hi rend='bold'>On the night before (according to the Jewish method of reckoning
their days, on the first night of) the great festal week of the
Pasch, Jesus celebrates the Paschal Supper with His disciples
in Jerusalem, washes their feet, exhorts them to imitate His
example of humility and charity, and hints at the sin of Judas.</hi>
</p>

<p>
21-30. <hi rend='bold'>He reveals the traitor, who then leaves the supper-room.</hi>
</p>

<p>
31-39. <hi rend='bold'>He foretells the near approach of His own death and glorification;
gives the new commandment of Christian charity, and predicts
the triple denial by Peter.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
With this chapter the second
part of the narrative of our
Gospel commences. See <ref target='Intro_IV'>Introd.
IV</ref>.
</p>

<p>
St. John now passes on to
the history of the events of
the night before our Lord's
death, omitting a number of
incidents of Holy Week, which
had been already recorded
by the Synoptic Evangelists.
Thus, he does not mention the
weeping over Jerusalem (Luke
xix. 39-44); the cursing of the
barren fig-tree (Matt. xxi. 18,
19, Mark xi. 12-14); or the
cleansing of the temple (Matt.
xxi. 12, 14; Mark xi. 15; Luke
xix. 45, 46). There can be
little doubt that it was his
intention to supplement the
Synoptic Gospels, for not only
does he omit many things
that they record, but he records
very much that they omit.
</p>

<anchor id='XIII_1'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Ante diem festum paschae,
sciens Iesus quia venit hora
eius ut transeat ex hoc mundo
ad Patrem: cum dilexisset
suos qui erant in mundo, in
finem dilexit eos.</cell>
<cell>1. Before the festival day of
the pasch, Jesus knowing that
his hour was come, that he
should pass out of this world
to the Father: having loved
his own who were in the world,
he loved them unto the end.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. <hi rend='bold'>Before the festival day
of the pasch.</hi> We are here
met by a serious difficulty
when we compare with
these words of St. John the
accounts of the Synoptic Evangelists;
for, while they represent
the supper, referred to
by St. John in verse 2, as
having taken place on the
evening of the first day of
Azymes, St. John here seems
to place it prior to that Feast.
If we had only the Synoptic
Gospels, we should, without
any hesitation, come to the
conclusion&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) that our Lord
and His Apostles ate the
Paschal Supper on the night
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
before He died; and (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) that
the Jews that year eat it on
the same night. For St.
Matthew tells us: <q>And on
the first day of the Azymes, the
disciples came to Jesus, saying:
Where wilt thou that we
prepare for thee to eat the
pasch? But Jesus said: Go ye
into the city to a certain man,
and say to him: The Master
saith, my time is near at hand;
with thee I make the pasch
with my disciples. And the
disciples did as Jesus appointed
to them, and they prepared
the pasch. But when it was
evening he sat down with
his twelve disciples</q> (Matt.
xxvi. 17-20). Similarly, St.
Mark (xiv. 12-17) and St.
Luke (xxii. 7-14) seem to take
for granted that the ordinary
time for celebrating the Paschal
Supper was come, for
St. Mark says: <q>Now on
the first day of the unleavened
bread, <emph>when they sacrificed the
pasch</emph>, the disciples say to
him,</q> &amp;c.; and St. Luke:
<q>And the day of the unleavened
bread came, on which
<emph>it was necessary</emph> that the pasch
should be killed.</q> St. John,
on the other hand, in the
verse before us, in which he
introduces his account of the
events of this last night of
Christ's mortal life, speaks of
the time as; <q><emph>Before</emph> the
festival day of the pasch.</q>
Moreover, in subsequent passages<note place='foot'>See, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, John xviii. 28, where we are told that the Jews, on the morning
of the crucifixion, abstained from entering the hall of Pilate, <q>that they might
not be defiled, but that they might <emph>eat the pasch</emph>.</q></note>
of our Gospel, to which
we shall direct attention as
they occur, St. John uses
language which, at first sight,
at least, would seem to show
that the Jews did not eat
the Pasch on the night of
Christ's last supper, but on
the following night, after He
was crucified. Hence the
difficulty of reconciling St.
John's account with that of
the Synoptic Evangelists. A
vast amount of learning has
been expended upon this
question, and a great deal has
been written upon it. We
shall indicate as briefly as
possible the different opinions,
and state what seems to us
most probable.
</p>

<p>
(1) Some, as St. Clement of
Alexandria, Calmet, &amp;c., have
held that our Lord did not eat
the Pasch at all in the last year
of His life. They argue from
texts in St. John, which prove,
they say, that the time for
eating the Pasch had not come
until after Christ was put to
death. They take the <q>first
day of the Azymes,</q> in the
Synoptic Gospels, to mean the
13th day of Nisan; and hold
that it, and not the 14th, was
so called because the Jews
removed all leaven from their
houses a day before the Feast.
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
In this view they have no difficulty
in reconciling St. John's
account with that of the other
Evangelists; for the Synoptic
Evangelists are then made to
represent the Last Supper as
having taken place on the 13th
of Nisan. That being so, it is at
once concluded that there cannot
be question of the Paschal
Supper, but of an ordinary
supper, and St. John, in agreement
with the Synoptists, states
that the supper in question
was held <q>before the festival
day of the pasch.</q>
</p>

<p>
This opinion, however, we
regard as wholly improbable
and untenable in the face of
the statements of the Synoptic
Evangelists, for these statements
are such as to leave no
reasonable doubt that our Lord
and His Apostles did eat the
Paschal Supper the night before
He died. Thus, they tell us
that the disciples were sent by
our Lord to prepare the Pasch,
that they prepared it, and that
when the time for eating it was
come, Christ sat down with
the Twelve.<note place='foot'>Matt. xxvi. 17-20; Mark xiv. 12-17; Luke xxii. 7-14.</note> Moreover, St.
Luke tells us that after they
sat down, Christ said: <q>With
desire I have desired to eat
this pasch with you before I
suffer</q> (Luke xxii. 15)&mdash;words
which clearly imply that on the
occasion of that last supper
the Pasch was eaten by Christ
and the Apostles. Hence the
opinion we are now considering,
which would reconcile the
Evangelists by holding that
our Lord, on the night before
He died, did not partake of
the Paschal Supper, but only
of an ordinary supper, is, as
we have already said, wholly
improbable; and, indeed, the
book of a certain Florentine
named Vecchietti, published
at the close of the sixteenth
century, and maintaining this
view, was condemned by the
Holy Office and its author
imprisoned.<note place='foot'>See Coleridge, <hi rend='italic'>Passiontide</hi>, Part ii., p. 33.</note>
</p>

<p>
(2) Others, especially among
the Greeks, admit that our
Lord did eat the Paschal Supper
on this occasion, but hold that
He did so on the night following
the 13th of Nisan, thus
anticipating by a day the ordinary
time for celebrating it.
</p>

<p>
But this view, too, seems
to us very improbable; for
the language of the Synoptic
Evangelists appears to us to
prove conclusively that our
Lord did not anticipate the
legal time for eating the Pasch,
which, as we know from Exod.
xii. 6, 8, and from tradition,
was the night following the 14th
of Nisan. Thus St. Mark, in the
passage already quoted, says:
<q>Now, on the first day of the
unleavened bread, when they
sacrificed (ἔθυον, the Imperf.
denoting what was <emph>customary</emph>)
the pasch, the disciples say to
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
Him: Whither wilt thou that
we go, and prepare for thee
to eat the pasch?</q> (Mark xiv.
12). And St. Luke: <q>And
the day of the unleavened
bread came, on which it was
<emph>necessary</emph> (ἔδει) that the pasch
should be killed</q> (Luke xxii.
7). These texts, we believe,
prove that our Lord celebrated
His last supper on the night
following the 14th of Nisan,
the night on which the Jews
were bound by their Law to
eat the Pasch. Hence we unhesitatingly
reject any view
which supposes Him to have
anticipated the legal time for
the Paschal Supper.
</p>

<p>
(3) Others, as Harduin,
Bisping, &amp;c., hold that the
13th of Nisan with the Judeans
was the 14th with the Galileans,
who therefore kept the
Pasch a day earlier than the
Judeans; and that our Lord,
being a Galilean, did the same.
This opinion, too, would enable
us to readily reconcile the
Evangelists; but unfortunately
the assumption as to a difference
of computation between
the Judeans and Galileans is a
mere conjecture, and has no
evidence to support it.
</p>

<p>
(4) Others, as Petav., Mald.,
Kuin., Coleridge,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Passiontide</hi>, Part ii., pp. 40-42.</note> Cornely, &amp;c.,
hold that our Lord and the
Apostles eat the Paschal Supper
on the night of the 14th of
Nisan, while the Jews that year
eat it on the night of the 15th.
Maldonatus holds that it was
customary with the Jews from
the time of the Babylonian
captivity, whenever the first
day of the Pasch fell on a
Friday, to transfer it to Saturday,
in order that two solemn
feasts might not occur on successive
days. According to this
view, our Lord corresponded
with the requirements of the
Jewish Law; the Jews, on
the other hand, followed the
custom which had been introduced
after the Babylonian
captivity. In this view, too,
it is easy to reconcile St. John's
statement with those of the
other Evangelists. He speaks
of the night of the Last Supper,
in reference to the feast as celebrated
that year by the Judeans,
and so places it <emph>before</emph> the feast;
they, on the other hand, speak of
it in reference to the strict Law,
and place it on the first day of
Azymes, or rather on the
night following the first day
of Azymes.<note place='foot'>Since the Jews removed all leaven from their houses on the 14th Nisan,
that day seems to have been called the first day of Azymes. It was <emph>during</emph>
that day that the last supper was <emph>prepared</emph>, but it was during the following
<emph>night</emph> (Exod. xii. 8), and therefore when the next Jewish day had already
commenced, that it was eaten.</note>
</p>

<p>
The great names of many
who have held this opinion,
lend to it considerable probability,
and if the custom which
is alleged in its favour were
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
proved to have existed in the
time of Christ, we would at
once adopt it. But it is seriously
disputed whether such a
custom did exist at that time.
It is true, indeed, that among
the modern Jews, when the
Paschal feast should begin on
Friday, they always defer it
till the Sabbath; and the
Talmud is referred to by
Comely (vol. iii., § 73, 1) as
saying that the same has been
the Jewish practice ever since
the Babylonian captivity.
Others, however, contend
that the custom is not as old
as the time of Christ, and that
in His time the first day of
the Pasch was kept on a
Friday whenever it happened
to fall on that day. Aben-Ezra
(on Levit. xxiii. 4) says:
<q>Tam ex Mischna quam ex
Talmude probatur Pascha in
secundam, quartam, et <emph>sextam</emph>
feriam quandoque incidisse.</q>
Since, then, the hypothesis on
which this opinion rests seems
doubtful, the opinion itself
appears to us less satisfactory
than that which follows.
</p>

<p>
(5) Lastly, there is the old,
and always the most common
opinion, that our Lord did eat
the Pasch at His last supper;
that He eat it on the night of
the 14th of Nisan; and that
the Jews eat it on that same
night. So St. Jer., St. Aug.,
St. Anselm, Suarez, Tolet.,
A Lap., Benedict XIV., Patriz.,
M'Carthy, Corluy, Didon.
This opinion is certainly in
accordance with the obvious
meaning of the Synoptic
Evangelists; and the objections
against it, which are
chiefly drawn from the Gospel
of St. John,<note place='foot'>The following are the passages from which the objections are drawn:&mdash;John
xiii. 1; xiii. 29; xviii. 28; xix. 14, 31.</note> can all be answered
satisfactorily, as we
shall show when discussing
the passages on which they
are founded.
</p>

<p>
We hold, then, that Christ
and the Jews eat the Pasch on
the night following the 14th
of Nisan, when, according to
the Jewish method of counting
their days, the 15th had already
commenced; and that Christ
was put to death on the 15th,
the first and most solemn day
of the Paschal week.
</p>

<p>
And now, returning to the
text of St. John, we are confronted
at the very commencement
of this chapter by an
objection to our view, in the
words: <q>Before the festival
day of the pasch.</q> If Christ
celebrated the Last Supper on
the night after the 14th of Nisan,
how does St. John speak of
the time of this supper as
<q>before the festival day of the
pasch</q>? To this difficulty
various answers have been
given. (1) Some have replied
that St. John means by <q>day</q>
the natural day, or time of
light; and then it is plain that
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
a supper celebrated on the
night following the 14th was
before the festival <emph>day</emph> of the
15th. This explanation is unsatisfactory,
for in the original
St. John does not merely say
<q>Before the festal day,</q> but
<q>Before the festal period</q>
(πρὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς; comp., <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, vii.
<ref target='VII_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='VII_14'>14</ref>, <ref target='VII_36'>37</ref>).
</p>

<p>
(2) Others say that the
words πρὸ τῆς ἑορτῆς are
equivalent to ἐν τῷ προεορτίῳ;
<q>quod ita praecedit festum,
ut tamen sit pars festi</q> are
the words of Bochart, with
whom Stier agrees. See
Smith's <hi rend='italic'>B. D.</hi>, Art. <q>Passover.</q>
</p>

<p>
(3) Others prefer to believe
that as St. John wrote sixty
years after the Last Supper,
after he had spent many years
in Asia Minor, and become
accustomed to Greek habits
of thought and expression, he
speaks according to the Greek
method of reckoning the day.
The Greeks, like ourselves,
reckoned their days from midnight
to midnight; and St. John,
speaking of the supper as
taking place before the midnight
that followed the 14th
of Nisan, might well refer
it to a time previous to the
festival.<note place='foot'>See the able article, by Dr. Molloy, in <hi rend='italic'>I. E. Record</hi>, vol. ix., pp. 445-464.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Jesus, knowing that his
hour was come, that he
should pass out of this
world to the Father.</hi> As
God, Jesus knew from all
eternity the hour of His death;
as man, he knew it from the
first moment of the Incarnation.
Knowing, then,
that He was about to pass
out of this vale of sorrow and
misery, and by His death,
resurrection, and ascension, go
to share in the glory of the
Father, having throughout
His life loved His Apostles
(His own), whom He was now
leaving behind Him to struggle
with the world, so He now
chose to manifest towards
them His love <emph>in an extraordinary
manner</emph>. Εἰς τέλος
which in our Rhemish Version
is translated <q>unto the end,</q>
we understand, with the Greek
fathers, who ought to be the
best judges of the meaning of
the phrase, as equivalent to
<emph>excessively</emph>, or <emph>in a surpassing
manner</emph>. This excessive love
Jesus manifested on this last
night, as well in the washing
of the Apostles' feet as in
the institution of the Blessed
Eucharist, the elevation of the
Apostles to the dignity of the
priesthood, and the loving
discourse which followed this
supper.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. Et coena facta, cum diabolus
iam misisset in cor ut
traderet eum Iudas Simonis
Iscariotae:</cell>
<cell>2. And when supper was
done (the devil having now
put into the heart of Judas
Iscariot, the son of Simon, to
betray him),</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. <hi rend='bold'>And when supper was
done.</hi> We have taken for
granted that the supper here
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
mentioned by St. John is
identical with the last supper
referred to by the Synoptic
Evangelists, for there is no
room for reasonable doubt as
to their identity. On both
occasions the traitor is revealed,
and the denial by Peter
foretold, and on both the
supper is followed by the
departure to the Garden of
Olives.<note place='foot'>The reader may consult with profit <hi rend='italic'>I. E. Record</hi>, vol. x., pp. 110-114.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>There are good grounds for
questioning the correctness of
the Greek reading, which in the
Vulgate is translated <q>coena
facta</q>; for the <emph>present</emph> participle
(γινομένου) and not the
past (γενομένου) is found in
many MSS. of the highest
authority. Finally, it is
obvious that, considering the
special signification of the
Greek verb employed (γίνομαι
<hi rend='italic'>to be, to come into being</hi>), even
the <emph>past</emph> participle by no means
implies that the supper was
then over, but merely that it
had commenced, and was then
going on. The same participle
is used unquestionably in this
sense in many passages of the
New Testament; as, for instance,
in John xxi. 4: <q>When
morning <emph>was come</emph>;</q> in Mark
vi. 2, <q><emph>during</emph> the Sabbath;</q>
Matt. xxvi. 6, <q>Jesus <emph>being</emph> now
at Bethany,</q> and in many other
passages</q> (Dr. Walsh, <hi rend='italic'>Harmony
of the Gospel Narratives</hi>,
note 19.) The meaning, then,
is that supper was proceeding.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>The devil having now put
into the heart of Judas
Iscariot, the son of Simon,
to betray him.</hi> This inhuman
treachery was suggested by
Satan, but freely consented to
by the wretched Apostle. The
treachery of Judas is here
mentioned to throw into relief
the loving mercy and condescension
of Jesus in washing
even the traitor's feet.
</p>

<anchor id='XIII_3'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Sciens quia omnia dedit
ei Pater in manus, et quia a
Deo exivit, et ad Deum vadit.</cell>
<cell>3. Knowing that the Father
had given him all things into
his hands, and that he came
from God, and goeth to God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. While fully conscious of
His dignity, of His supreme
dominion over all things, and of
the fact that He had come out
from the bosom of God in the
incarnation, and would return
thither by His resurrection and
ascension, He yet makes Himself
as it were the servant of
His Apostles.
</p>

<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Surgit a coena, et ponit
vestimenta sua: et cum accepisset
linteum, praecinxit se.</cell>
<cell>4. He riseth from supper,
and layeth aside his garments,
and having taken a towel,
girded himself.</cell></row></table>

<p>
4. <hi rend='bold'>He riseth from supper.</hi>
Hence it is clear that the
supper had already begun when
the washing of the Apostles'
feet took place. And for the
reasons given above on verse
2, as also because of verse 12
(<q>being sat down again</q>) we
hold that it was <emph>not over</emph>;
so that we adhere to the traditional
view that the washing
of the feet took place
during the supper.<note place='foot'><q>Adhuc coenabatur quum Dominus surrexit et pedes lavit discipulis
suis.</q>&mdash;St. Aug.</note> Commentators
generally hold that
the Paschal Supper on the
present occasion was followed
by the ordinary supper or
evening meal, and this again
by what we may call the
Eucharistic Supper. It is
generally held that the washing
of the feet took place
immediately after the Paschal
Supper, or during the ordinary,
and before the Eucharistic
Supper. At the Paschal Supper
the company at the table might
not be less than ten nor more
than twenty. In our Lord's time
those partaking of the supper
reclined on couches, this being
the usage then, as standing
had been originally. <q>The
rites of the supper were regulated
according to the succession
of four, sometimes five,
cups of red wine mixed with
water, which were placed
before the head of the house or
the most eminent guest, who
was called the celebrant, the
president, or <hi rend='italic'>proclaimer of the
feast</hi>.</q><note place='foot'>Anyone who desires fuller information on the rites of the Paschal Supper
will find it in Maclean's account given by Dr. Walsh in the note referred to
above.</note> (See Dr. Walsh, <hi rend='italic'>Harmony
of the Gospel Narratives</hi>,
note 16.)
</p>

<p>
Christ having risen from the
supper <hi rend='bold'>layeth aside his garments</hi>.
The pallium or cloak,
a square or oblong piece of
cloth, which was thrown loosely
around the body outside the
tunic, was probably what was
laid aside;<note place='foot'><q>Quam enim Romani togam aut pallium, id est summan vestem,
Graeci, ui ex Plutarcho discimus, το ἱμάτίον appellabant.</q>&mdash;Mald, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>.</note> and thus Jesus
made Himself more like a
servant, for servants were not
accustomed to wear the cloak.
Then He took a towel, and
girded Himself therewith.
<q>Quid mirum,</q> says St. Augustine,
si <q>praecinxit se linteo qui
formam servi accipiens habitu
inventus est ut homo?</q> Note
how the Evangelist narrates
every little circumstance connected
with this act of marvellous
condescension.
</p>

<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. Deinde mittit aquam in
pelvim, et coepit lavare pedes
discipulorum, et extergere linteo
quo erat praecinctus.</cell>
<cell>5. After that, he putteth
water into a basin, and began to
wash the feet of his disciples,
and to wipe them with the
towel, wherewith he was
girded.</cell></row></table>

<p>
5. <hi rend='bold'>After that, he putteth
water into a basin.</hi> In the
Greek we have <emph>the</emph> basin (τὸν
νιπτῆρα), probably denoting a
vessel ordinarily used for the
washing of feet, or that had
been provided for the ceremony
of the washing of hands, which
was portion of the ritual of the
Paschal Supper. We take it
that the fourth and fifth verses
describe in a general way how
our Lord set about washing
the disciples' feet.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Venit ergo ad Simonem
Petrum. Et dicet ei Petrus:
Domine, tu mihi lavas pedes?</cell>
<cell>6. He cometh therefore to
Simon Peter. And Peter said
to him: Lord, dost thou wash
my feet?</cell></row></table>

<p>
6. Here the Evangelist goes
on to state in detail what
happened when our Lord presented
Himself first of all before
Peter. Thus we need not
suppose that our Lord had
washed the feet of any other
disciple before He came to
Peter. St. Peter almost always
stands first among the Apostles,
and on the present occasion,
the remonstrance would naturally
come from the first person
at whose feet our Lord presented
Himself.
</p>

<p>
<q>There is nothing to support
the old notion that the action
began with Judas. It is more
natural to suppose that the
Lord began with St. Peter. In
that case his refusal to accept
the services is more intelligible
than it would be if others had
already accepted it</q> (Westc.
in <hi rend='italic'>The Speaker's Commentary</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Dost thou wash my feet?</hi>
The position of the pronouns
in the Greek brings out sharply
the contrast of the persons.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Respondit Iesus, et dixit
ei: Quod ego facio, tu nescis
modo, scies autem postea.</cell>
<cell>7. Jesus answered, and said
to him: What I do, thou
knowest not now, but thou
shalt know hereafter.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. Peter, bewildered by His
Divine Master's condescension,
is told that he shall afterwards
learn the moral significance of
what Jesus was about to do.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>8. Dicit ei Petrus: Non
lavabis mihi pedes in aeternum.
Respondit ei Iesus: Si
non lavero te, non habebis
partem mecum.</cell>
<cell>8. Peter said to him: Thou
shalt never wash my feet.
Jesus answered him: If I wash
thee not, thou shalt have no
part with me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
8. Strong in faith, and mindful
of the dignity of his Master,
with that impetuosity which
displayed itself on other
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
occasions, Peter declares that
he will never consent to such
an act of self-abasement on
the part of his Lord. Christ
at once replies to him: <hi rend='bold'>If I
wash thee not, thou shalt
have no part with me.</hi> The
meaning is, that if Peter
refused obedience to Christ's
wish, now distinctly made
known to him in these words,
he should be excluded from
Christ's society here and hereafter.
Complete surrender of his
will to Christ was a necessary
condition of discipleship.
</p>

<p>
The washing of the feet here
referred to is not a sacrament;
the practice of the Church
makes this clear. Besides, it
cannot be shown that grace
was annexed to it. No doubt,
without it Peter was to have
no part with Christ; but this,
we hold, would be the effect of
disobedience, not the result of
wanting anything which the
washing could bestow. In
reality, Peter was already in
the state of grace, for in the
tenth verse Jesus tells the
Apostles that they are <emph>clean</emph>;
and though He qualifies the
statement by saying that all are
not clean, yet St. John explains
this qualification in reference to
Judas only. Hence Peter was
already in the state of grace,
and there is nothing in the text
or context to show that he was
to obtain grace if his feet were
washed, but only that he was
to lose it if they were not.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>9. Dicit ei Simon Petrus:
Domine, non tantum pedes
meos, sed et manus, et caput.</cell>
<cell>9. Simon Peter saith to him:
Lord, not only my feet, but also
my hands and my head.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Dicit ei Iesus: Qui lotus
est, non indiget nisi ut pedes
lavet, sed est mundus totus.
Et vos mundi estis, sed non
omnes.</cell>
<cell>10. Jesus saith to him: He
that is washed, needeth not but
to wash his feet, but is clean
wholly. And you are clean,
but not all.</cell></row></table>

<p>
10. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus saith to him: He
that is washed</hi> (rather <emph>bathed</emph>),
<hi rend='bold'>needeth not but to wash his
feet, but is clean wholly</hi>.
Some ancient authorities omit
the words <q>but</q> and <q>his
feet,</q> and the meaning whether
in regard to body or soul is
then clear and simple, namely,
that he who has bathed has
no need to wash, but is already
clean. However, the words
are much more probably
genuine; and the difficulty
they create is doubtless the
reason why they are wanting
in some authorities. Taking
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
them as genuine, then, let us
try to explain the verse. Some
have understood our Lord
to speak only of a corporal
washing, as if He merely
meant that the Apostles
who had bathed, or at least
washed their hands before this
Supper (see above on <ref target='II_6'>ii. 6</ref>),
now needed nothing except to
have their feet washed. But
the common opinion of commentators
understands our
Lord to speak of a spiritual
washing, of which the washing
of the feet was a symbol,
and this view we accept.
For the closing words of the
verse: <q>And you are clean,
but not all</q> when taken together
with St. John's explanation
in verse 11, leave no doubt
that our Lord speaks of spiritual
cleanness, and therefore
we may fairly conclude that
He speaks also of a spiritual
washing. He was about to
wash their feet literally, but
He intended that ceremony as
a symbol of the higher cleansing
process required of them
and others as a fitting preparation
before receiving the
Blessed Eucharist. Such preparation
was not absolutely
necessary in their case, for
they were already clean from
mortal sin, but it was fitting
and in some sense required,
in order that they might remove
the dust of venial sin,
which was daily clinging to
them in their contact with the
world. It is clearly implied
that if they had not been
clean, that is to say, free from
mortal sin, a more thorough
cleansing would have
necessary.
</p>

<p>
The meaning, then, seems
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
to be that one who has bathed
spiritually by having his soul
cleansed from mortal sin, needs
afterwards, as a fitting preparation
for the Blessed Eucharist,
merely that limited cleansing
that was symbolized by the
washing of only the feet.
</p>

<anchor id='XIII_11'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. Sciebat enim quisnam
esset qui traderet eum: propterea
dixit: Non estis mundi
omnes.</cell>
<cell>11. For he knew who he was
that would betray him; therefore
he said: You are not all
clean.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12. Postquam ergo lavit
pedes eorum, et accepit vestimenta
sua: cum recubuisset
iterum, dixit eis: Scitis quid
fecerim vobis?</cell>
<cell>12. Then after he had washed
their feet, and taken his garments,
being sat down again,
he said to them: Know you
what I have done to you?</cell></row>
<row><cell>13. Vos vocatis me, Magister
et Domine: et benedicitis:
sum etenim.</cell>
<cell>13. You call me Master, and
Lord: and you say well, for
so I am.</cell></row>
<row><cell>14. Si ergo ego lavi pedes
vestros, Dominus et Magister:
et vos debetis alter alterius
lavare pedes.</cell>
<cell>14. If then I, being <hi rend='italic'>your</hi>
Lord and Master, have washed
your feet; you also ought to
wash one another's feet.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15. Exemplum enim dedi
vobis, ut quemadmodum ego
feci vobis, ita et vos faciatis.</cell>
<cell>15. For I have given you an
example, that as I have done
to you, so you do also.</cell></row>
<row><cell>16. Amen, amen dico vobis:
Non est servus maior domino
suo: neque apostolus maior
est eo qui misit illum.</cell>
<cell>16. Amen, amen, I say to
you: The servant is not greater
than his lord: neither is the
apostle greater than he that
sent him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
12-16. Having concluded the
washing of the feet, and <emph>again
reclined</emph>, Jesus points out to the
Apostles the moral significance
of what He had done. If He,
whom they rightly called Lord
and Master condescended to
wash their feet, how much more
ought they to wash the feet of
one another, and perform towards
one another similar acts
of humility and mutual charity?
It was that they might reflect
in their own lives this spirit of
humility and charity that He
had set them the example; and
though such humble offices of
charity might at first sight
seem unworthy of them, or
beneath them, yet a servant
is not greater than his master;
and whither Christ had stooped
they too should be prepared to
stoop.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Si haec scitis, beati eritis
si feceritis ea.</cell>
<cell>17. If you know these things,
you shall be blessed if you do
them.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17. In this verse, He promises
them happiness here and
hereafter, if they continue to
fulfil towards one another such
offices of humility and mutual
charity.
</p>

<anchor id='XIII_18'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Non de omnibus vobis
dico: ego scio quos elegerim:
sed ut adimpleatur scriptura:
Qui manducat mecum panem,
levabit contra me calcaneum
suum.</cell>
<cell>18. I speak not of you all: I
know whom I have chosen:
but that the scripture may be
fulfilled, <hi rend='italic'>He that eateth bread
with me, shall lift up his heel
against me</hi>.</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. Christ does not here
qualify the promise made in
verse 17, for that promise was
conditional, and as such is universally
true. But taking occasion
from the word <q>blessed,</q>
which He had used, He proceeds
to say that not all of
them are, or shall be, blessed.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>I know whom I have
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
chosen.</hi> SS. Aug. and Bede
understand Christ to speak of
the choice or election by which
He had predestined some to
<emph>glory</emph>; and as Judas was not
predestined, therefore Christ
had not intended to speak of
blessedness in connection with
him. But since, in other parts
of Scripture, Christ never
attributes the act of predestinating
to Himself, but only to
the Father, hence we prefer,
with Tol., Mald., A Lap., to
understand here not of election
to glory, but of the call to the
Apostleship; and the sense is:
I know what sort are the
twelve whom I have chosen to
be Apostles, and that one of
them is not blessed, and never
shall be. <hi rend='bold'>But that the Scripture
may be fulfilled.</hi> The
sense is: but though I know
and knew how unworthy one
of you is, still I called him
to the Apostleship, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled
which foretold his ingratitude
and guilt. That the prediction
of the treachery of Judas did
not deprive him of his liberty,
nor extenuate his guilt, see
above on <ref target='XII_37'>xii. 38</ref>. The Scripture
quoted is from Psalm xl.
10, where David complains of
the ingratitude of some person
whom he had treated as his
familiar friend. David and his
false friend were types of
Christ and Judas; and, as we
learn from the present passage
of St. John, the mystical sense
of David's words had reference
to the betrayal of Christ by
Judas. In the quotation, the
words <hi rend='bold'>shall lift</hi> (or rather <q>has
lifted,</q> for <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>levabit</foreign> ought to be
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>levavit</foreign>) <hi rend='bold'>up his heel against
me</hi>, are to be taken metaphorically.
The meaning probably
is that the ingratitude of Judas
is like that of the beast which
kicks him who feeds it and
treats it kindly.
</p>

<anchor id='XIII_19'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Amodo dico vobis, priusquam
fiat: ut cum factum
fuerit, credatis quia ego sum.</cell>
<cell>19. At present I tell you,
before it come to pass: that
when it shall come to pass,
you may believe that I am he.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. Christ tells them that He
now makes known to them
the treachery of one of them,
in order that when it shall
have come to pass, they may
remember that He had foreknowledge
of it, and may
believe Him to be God.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Amen, amen dico vobis:
qui accipit si quem misero, me
accipit: qui autem me accipit,
accipit eum qui me misit.</cell>
<cell>20. Amen, amen, I say to
you, he that receiveth whomsoever
I send, receiveth me:
and he that receiveth me, receiveth
him that sent me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
20. Some hold that this
verse has no connection with
the context here; and that the
words of Christ with which it
was connected are omitted by
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
our Evangelist. Others connect
in various ways. With
Beelen, we prefer to connect
as follows. In verses 15-17,
Christ had exhorted the Apostles
to share in His humiliations;
then, in verses 18 and 19 he
digressed, to speak of the
treachery of Judas; and now
after the digression He tells
them, for their consolation,
that they shall be sharers in
His honour.
</p>

<p>
Some harmonists place the
institution of the Blessed
Eucharist immediately after
the words recorded in verse
20; others, after verse 22;
and others, at other points
in the narrative.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>21. Cum haec dixisset Iesus,
turbatus est spiritu: et protestatus
est, et dixit: Amen,
amen dico vobis: quia unus ex
vobis tradet me.</cell>
<cell>21. When Jesus had said
these things, he was troubled
in spirit: and he testified, and
said: Amen, amen, I say to
you, one of you shall betray
me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
21. <hi rend='bold'>He was troubled in
spirit.</hi> As we said above
on <ref target='XI_23'>xi. 23</ref>, this perturbation of
soul was freely permitted by
Christ. The disclosure of the
traitor had been begun earlier
in the night. It is recorded
more or less fully by the four
Evangelists, but in such a
manner as to render it extremely
probable that Christ
returned to the subject several
times during the night. St.
Matthew (xxvi. 21, and foll.)
and St. Mark (xiv. 18, and
following) record the allusion
to the traitor, immediately
before the institution of the
Blessed Eucharist. St. Luke,
on the other hand, records it
immediately after the same
event: <q>This is the chalice,
the New Testament, in my
blood, which shall be shed for
you. But yet behold, the hand
of him that betrayeth me is
with me on the table</q> (Luke
xxii. 20, 21). St. John does
not refer, at least explicitly, to
the institution of the Blessed
Eucharist; but in his narrative
the treachery of Judas is at
first insinuated during the
washing of the feet (verse 10);
again alluded to in verse 18;
and, finally, clearly foretold in
verse 26. We can best reconcile
all the Evangelists by holding
that, in the hope of deterring
Judas from his awful
purpose, our Lord returned
several times to the same
subject: first, during the washing
of the feet, as in St. John;
then before the institution of
the Blessed Eucharist, as in
SS. Matthew and Mark; then,
immediately after the institution,
as in St. Luke; and finally,
when the dipped bread was
handed to the traitor, and he
left the room, as in St. John.
</p>

<p>
<q>No doubt it would be
difficult to admit this supposition
if the words in question
(the words of the Synoptic
Evangelists) contained, as
seems generally to be taken
for granted, a distinct identification
of the traitor. For
it could hardly be supposed
that Judas, if thus pointed
out, could have retained
his place at the supper
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
table, among the Apostles.
But, in reality, there is no
reason to regard the expressions
recorded by St.
Matthew and St. Mark&mdash;and
the same may be said of that
recorded by St. Luke&mdash;as thus
distinctly identifying the one
who was to betray our Lord.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>We may, indeed, regard
them as conveying an intimation
to <emph>Judas himself</emph>, if, as
may be supposed, at the time
they were uttered, or shortly
before it, his hand had been
upon the table, or if he had
helped himself to some meat
from the same dish as our
Lord, and those others who
sat in immediate proximity to
Him. Or we may even suppose
that those expressions, or at
least some of them, were
<emph>altogether indefinite</emph>, so as to
convey only the sad intelligence
that it was one of His
chosen Twelve who was about
to betray Him; just as the
words, <q><emph>Unus vestrum</emph> me
traditurus est,</q> of St. Matthew
(xxvi. 21), or the <q><emph>Unus ex
vobis</emph> tradet me, qui manducat
mecum</q> of St. Mark (xiv. 18),
or the prophetic words of the
Psalmist (Ps. xl. 10) quoted
by our Lord, as recorded by
St. John (xiii. 18), <q><emph>Qui
manducat mecum panem</emph>,
levabit contra me calcaneum
suum.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But there appears no
sufficient reason for supposing
that any of the expressions
hitherto quoted was calculated,
or was intended, to identify
the traitor, at least <emph>in the eyes
of his fellow-Apostles</emph>.<note place='foot'>Matt. xxvi. 25: <q>And Judas that betrayed him, answering said: Is it I,
Rabbi? He saith to him: Thou hast said <hi rend='italic'>it</hi>,</q> presents considerable difficulty,
as Judas appears to be there distinctly pointed out. Some have held that
only the traitor himself heard Christ's reply; but it is difficult to see how
some of the others close to Jesus should not also hear it. Hence we prefer to
hold that these words, though recorded by St. Matt. before his account of
the institution of the Blessed Eucharist were in reality not spoken till after
the dipped bread had been given to the traitor.</note> Thus,
then, there is no difficulty in
supposing that they may have
been spoken by our Lord at
even an early period of the
supper.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The incident recorded by
St. John (xiii. 21, 30) is
of an essentially different
character. There our Lord,
after announcing in general
terms, <q>Unus ex vobis tradet
me,</q> is appealed to by St. John,
at the instance of St. Peter, to
declare who the traitor may be.
The request of the beloved
disciple is promptly met by the
response, <q>Ille est, cui ego
intinctum panem porrexero;</q>
and the traitor is immediately
pointed out by the signal thus
selected by our Lord: <q>Et
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
quum intinxisset panem, dedit
Judae Simonis Iscariotae.</q></q><note place='foot'>Dr. Walsh, <hi rend='italic'>Harmony of the Gospel Narratives</hi>, pp. 137, 138.</note>
</p>

<anchor id='XIII_22'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Aspiciebant ergo ad invicem
discipuli, haesitantes de
quo diceret.</cell>
<cell>22. The disciples therefore
looked one upon another,
doubting of whom he spoke.</cell></row></table>

<p>
22. <hi rend='bold'>The disciples therefore
looked</hi> (rather, <emph>were
looking</emph>, as in the original and
Vulgate) <hi rend='bold'>one upon another,
doubting of whom he spoke</hi>.
The words vividly recall the
actual scene. Strange as the
prediction was, no one doubted
its fulfilment; they merely
doubted of whom He spoke.
We say of <emph>whom</emph> He spoke,
for though the original might
mean, of <emph>what</emph> He spoke,
Peter's question immediately
afterwards: <q>Who is it of
whom he speaketh?</q> (v. 24),
shows that their doubt regarded
merely which of them was to
betray Him. Earlier in the
night, when He first referred
to the betrayal, they may perhaps
have doubted even <emph>what</emph>
He meant; but that stage was
now passed, and the only
doubt remaining was as to
which of their number was to
play the part of traitor.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Erat ergo recumbens
unus ex discipulis eius in sinu
Iesu, quem diligebat Iesus.</cell>
<cell>23. Now there was leaning
on Jesus' bosom one of his
disciples whom Jesus loved.</cell></row></table>

<p>
23. <hi rend='bold'>Now there was leaning
on Jesus' bosom.</hi> Rather:
<q>Now there was reclining at
the table <emph>in</emph> (ἀνακείμενος ... ἐν)
Jesus' bosom.</q> Instead of
sitting at table, as we do now,
the Jews of our Lord's time,
and for some time before and
after, reclined. The guests
lay resting on their left arm,
stretched obliquely, their feet
being behind them, instead of
under the table, as with us.
In this way a guest was reclining
close to the bosom of
the guest behind him, and
such was the position that
St. John occupied in reference
to Christ on this occasion.
When three reclined on the
same couch, the centre was
the place of honour.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>One of his disciples whom
Jesus loved.</hi> This, according
to all antiquity, was our
Evangelist himself. The title,
which occurs here for the first
time, is perhaps suggested by
the recollection of the privileged
position he occupied at
the Last Supper. It occurs
again, <ref target='XIX_26'>xix. 26</ref>; xxi. <ref target='XXI_7'>7</ref>, <ref target='XXI_20'>20</ref>.
Comp. also <ref target='XX_2'>xx. 2</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Innuit ergo huic Simon
Petrus, et dixit ei: Quis est,
de quo dicit?</cell>
<cell>24. Simon Peter therefore
beckoned to him, and said to
him: Who is it of whom he
speaketh?</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. The best-supported
Greek reading agrees substantially
with the Vulgate:
<q>Simon Peter therefore
beckoneth to him, and saith
unto him, Tell who it is of
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
whom he speaketh.</q> According
to this reading, St.
John was not asked to inquire
of Jesus who the traitor was,
but St. Peter takes for granted
that St. John had already
learned from Jesus, and simply
asks the beloved disciple
to make it known to them all.
In the other and less probable
reading, St. John is asked <emph>to
inquire</emph> (πυθέσθαι) who the
traitor is. It might seem
more in accordance with St.
Peter's character, that he
should directly ask our Lord
to point out the traitor, but
it is possible that Christ's
threat, recorded in verse 8,
may have made him less confident
than usual.
</p>

<anchor id='XIII_25'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Itaque cum recubuisset
ille supra pectus Iesu, dicit ei:
Domine quis est!</cell>
<cell>25. He therefore leaning on
the breast of Jesus saith to him:
Lord, who is it?</cell></row></table>

<p>
25. If St. Peter supposed
that St. John already knew
who the traitor was, he was
mistaken, as we see by this
verse.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>He therefore leaning on.</hi>
The best-supported Greek
reading would be rendered
thus: <hi rend='italic'>He leaning back, as he
was, on</hi> &amp;c. (ἀναπεσὼν ἐκεῖνος
οὕτως ἐπί).
</p>

<p>
From his reclining position,
St. John had merely to lean a
little farther back in order to
rest his head on His Divine
Master's breast. Thus <q>as
he was,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, without changing
his position at table, by
merely leaning back, he was
not only close to the <emph>bosom</emph> of
Jesus, but was on His breast,
and could whisper his question.
All the fathers speak of
the privilege conferred upon
St. John on this occasion in
his being admitted to such
familiarity with his Divine
Master.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>26. Respondit Iesus: Ille est
cui ego intinctum panem porrexero.
Et cum intinxisset
panem, dedit Iudae Simonis
Iscariotae.</cell>
<cell>26. Jesus answered: He it is
to whom I shall reach bread
dipped. And when he had
dipped the bread, he gave it
to Judas Iscariot, <hi rend='italic'>the son</hi> of
Simon.</cell></row></table>

<p>
26. If we suppose the bread
which was handed to Judas
to have been dipped in the
Charoseth (חרוסת) a kind of
sauce used at the Paschal
Supper, then the meats of the
Paschal Supper must have
been still upon the table.
This there is no difficulty in
admitting, even if the ordinary
supper, following upon the
Paschal Supper, had already
been partaken of.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>27. Et post buccellam, introivit
in eim Satanas. Et dixit
ei Iesus; Quod facis, fac citius.</cell>
<cell>27. And after the morsel,
Satan entered into him. And
Jesus said to him: That which
thou dost, do quickly.</cell></row></table>

<p>
27. After the morsel had
been given to Judas, <q>Satan
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
entered into him;</q> that is to
say, Judas now revealed as a
traitor, at least to St. John,
became still more confirmed
in his evil purpose. The words
are generally understood not as
implying corporal possession
of Judas by the devil, but as
signifying that the devil now
gained full control over him in
reference to the crime contemplated.
<hi rend='bold'>And Jesus said to
him: That which thou dost,
do quickly</hi>, again intimating
that He knew the traitor's
thoughts, and at the same time
manifesting His own readiness
to suffer. These words of our
Lord do not contain a command
or permission to Judas to commit
the crime: but, taking for
granted the traitor's fixed determination
<q>That which thou
dost,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, hast determined to
do, they show Christ's readiness
and eagerness to begin to drink
of the chalice that awaited Him.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>28. Hoc autem nemo scivit
discumbentium ad quid dixerit
ei.</cell>
<cell>28. Now no man at the table
knew to what purpose he said
this unto him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
28. The disciples, even St.
John, knew not to what purpose
Christ had told Judas to
do quickly what he was determined
to do. Though St. John,
at least, had learned immediately
before that Judas was to betray
our Lord, still he probably did
not expect that the betrayal
would follow so rapidly upon
the disclosure of the traitor.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>29. Quidam enim putabant,
quia loculos habebat Judas,
quod dixisset ei Iesus: Eme ea
quae opus sunt nobis ad diem
festum: aut egenis ut aliquid
daret.</cell>
<cell>29. For some thought, because
Judas had the purse, that
Jesus had said to him: Buy
those things which we have
need of for the festival day: or
that he should give something
to the poor.</cell></row></table>

<p>
29. <hi rend='bold'>For some thought ...
for the festival day</hi>.
This conjecture of the Apostles
is adduced by some writers
as a proof that the supper
mentioned by St. John in
this thirteenth chapter is not
the Paschal Supper; or, if the
Paschal Supper, that it was not
celebrated on the night of the
14th of Nisan. They argue&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>)
that on the night of the 14th
of Nisan it would not have been
lawful to buy or sell; and,
therefore, the Apostles would
not have conjectured as on this
occasion they did; and (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) that
on the night of the 14th of Nisan
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
the Feast would already have
begun, and the Apostles would
not have conjectured that Judas
was about to buy necessaries in
preparation for the Feast.
</p>

<p>
But to (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) we reply that the
buying and selling of articles
of food was not forbidden
during the Pasch (Exod. xii.
16), and certainly was not forbidden
on a festival that fell, as
in this case, on a Friday, the
day before the Sabbath. To
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) we answer that though the
festival time had begun, yet
it lasted seven days; and the
fact that a few hours of the
festal period had already elapsed
would not prevent the Apostles
from conjecturing that Judas
might be making provision for
the long period that was still to
come. <hi rend='bold'>To the poor.</hi> From this
conjecture, and from xii. 5, we
may conclude that our Lord and
the Apostles were in the habit
of giving alms to the poor.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>30. Cum ergo accepisset ille
buccellam, exivit continuo. Erat
autem nox.</cell>
<cell>30. He therefore having received
the morsel, went out
immediately. And it was night.</cell></row></table>

<p>
30. When Judas found himself
revealed as the traitor, he
immediately left the supper-room.
The Evangelist adds:
<hi rend='bold'>And it was night</hi>, no doubt in
order to give completeness to
the history, but possibly also
to mark the contrast of the
light Judas left behind him with
the outer darkness into which
he went forth. <q>Erat autem
nox,</q> says St. Aug., <q>Et ipse
qui exivit erat nox.</q>
</p>

<p>
Let us here pause for a
moment in the narrative of St.
John to inquire whether the
Blessed Eucharist was instituted
before the departure
of Judas; whether, therefore,
he sacrilegiously received the
Blessed Eucharist and was ordained
priest at the Last Supper.
The great majority of the fathers
answer in the affirmative.
This view seems to us extremely
probable. For the
Synoptic Evangelists all take
care to tell us that Jesus sat
down with the Twelve; and
then a few verses afterwards,
without any indication of a
change in the company, without
the slightest hint that anyone
had departed, they proceed:
<q>And whilst they were at
supper, Jesus took bread, and
blessed, and broke, and gave
to His disciples, and said:
Take ye, and eat; this is My
body</q> (Matt. xxvi. 26). Compare
St. Mark and St. Luke.
Hence, although they must have
had the treachery of Judas before
their minds while writing,
yet they say not a word about
his departure, as it might
naturally be expected they
would, if he had actually departed.
Nay, St. Luke's version
of our Lord's words clearly implies
that Judas was present at
the institution of the Blessed
Eucharist; for in St. Luke our
Lord seems to contrast His own
love in instituting the Blessed
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
Eucharist with the treachery
of <emph>one who was present</emph>. <q>This
is the chalice, the New Testament
in My blood, which shall
be shed for you. <hi rend='italic'>But yet</hi> behold,
the hand of him that betrayeth
Me is with Me on the table</q>
(Luke xxii. 20, 21). Therefore,
according to St. Luke, Judas
was still at the table after the
institution; and St. Mark states
that all present drank of the
chalice: <q>And they all drank
of it</q> (xiv. 23).
</p>

<p>
It seems to us, then, much
more probable that Judas received
the Blessed Eucharist,
and was ordained priest at the
Last Supper. Many, however,
hold the opposite view; among
others, St. Hilary, Innocent
III., Salmeron, B. Lamy,
Corluy, Langen, and Cornely.
The latter says that he agrees
in this <q>Cum plerisque modernis</q>
(Corn., iii., p. 298, note).
Their principal arguments are:
(1) That St. Matthew, who was
present at the Last Supper,
records the disclosure of the
traitor <emph>before</emph> the institution
of the Eucharist, while we
know from St. John (verse 30)
that Judas departed when he
was disclosed: therefore he
departed before the institution
of the Eucharist. But this
argument loses its force, if
we hold as above, that Christ
referred on several occasions
during the night to the treachery
of Judas, and <emph>only on
the last occasion</emph> definitely disclosed
who the traitor was.
</p>

<p>
(2) They say, that surely
our Lord did not allow Judas
to make a sacrilegious Communion
and receive Holy
Orders, when He could so
easily have prevented it. But
we may reply that Christ referred
several times to the
betrayal, in order to recall
Judas to a better sense; failing
in this, He left him free,
just as He leaves unworthy
communicants or bad priests
free now.
</p>

<p>
We believe, then, that modern
commentators have no solid
reason for departing from what
was undeniably the common
view in the early Church, that
Judas at the Last Supper did
receive Holy Communion and
was ordained priest.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>31. Cum ergo exisset, dixit
Iesus: Nunc clarificatus est
Filius hominis: et Deus clarificatus
est in eo.</cell>
<cell>31. When he therefore was
gone out, Jesus said: Now is
the son of man glorified, and
God is glorified in him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
31. With this verse our
Lord's last discourses begin.
They are divided into two
portions by the change of
place at the close of chapter
xiv., the first portion containing
what was spoken in the
Supper Room (xiii. 31-xiv. 31);
the second, what was spoken
just outside the Supper Room or
along the way to Gethsemane
or at some point on the way
(xv., xvi.). In the first portion
the leading ideas are that He
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
and the Apostles are to be
separated because He is about
to ascend to the glory of the
Father; still, that notwithstanding
the separation, they
shall not be orphans, but He
and they shall be united.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>When he therefore was
gone out Jesus said.</hi> The
departure of Judas marked the
beginning of the end, and
Jesus at once turned to the
eleven with words that prove
His knowledge of what was
about to happen, and His
acceptance of the issue of the
traitor's work.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Now is the son of man
glorified.</hi> Judas had finally
decided to betray Him, and
He Himself had fully accepted
what was to follow, so that
His death, now so certain and
so near, might be spoken of as
already past: <q>is ... glorified.</q>
For their consolation
and encouragement He refers
to His death as a glorification,
as indeed it was, being
a triumph over Satan and sin,
and the prelude to victory over
death itself.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And God is glorified in
him.</hi> God's rigorous justice
and boundless love for men
were manifested by His sending
His Divine Son to die for
them, and hence God was
glorified in the death of Christ.
See Rom. iii. 25, 26; v. 8, 9.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>32. Si Deus clarificatus est
in eo, et Deus clarificabit eum
in semetipso: et continuo clarificabit
eum.</cell>
<cell>32. If God be glorified in
him, God also will glorify him
in himself: and immediately
will he glorify him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
32. Many authorities omit
the words: <q>If God be glorified
in him.</q> <hi rend='bold'>In himself.</hi>
The meaning seems to be: <emph>with</emph>
Himself, as in xvii. 5: <q>And
now glorify thou me, O Father,
with thyself.</q> <hi rend='bold'>Immediately</hi>,
we refer to the time of the
crucifixion.
</p>

<anchor id='XIII_33'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>33. Filioli, adhuc modicum
vobiscum sum quaeretis me:
et sicut dixi Iudaeis: Quo ego
vado, vos non potestis venire:
et vobis dico modo.</cell>
<cell>33. Little children, yet a little
while I am with you. You shall
seek me, and as I said to the
Jews: Whither I go, you cannot
come: so I say to you now.</cell></row></table>

<p>
33. The glorification of Christ
implied His departure from the
Apostles, and the time was
now come for making known
to them the separation. At
present they, any more than
His enemies, could not follow
Him, and what He had before
declared to His enemies (vii.
<ref target='VII_33'>33</ref>, <ref target='VII_34'>34</ref>), He now declares to
His dearest friends. Yet,
though the substance of the
declaration is in both cases
the same, Christ's purpose in
making it was very different.
To the Jews it was made in
the hope that they would thus
be urged to make good use of
the time that still remained to
them before the separation,
while in the present case the
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
motive seems rather to be to
forearm the Apostles by forewarning
them and putting
before them various motives
of consolation.
</p>

<p>
The term (τεκνία) occurs
only here in the Gospels, but
is found six (or seven) times
in St. John's First Epistle. The
diminutive form is expressive
of tender affection, and perhaps
of anxiety for those who were
still immature.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Little children you shall
seek me</hi>, &amp;c. See above on
<ref target='VII_34'>vii. 34</ref>. The declaration is
somewhat different in form on
this second occasion. The
words: <q>and shall not find
me</q> (<ref target='VII_34'>vii. 34</ref>) are omitted, and
instead of: <q>where I am</q> the
present text has: <q>whither I
go.</q> As we have said, the
leading idea in both cases is
of separation, but since that
separation was to be followed
in the case of the Apostles by
spiritual union (xiv. 18, 23),
hence He now omits the words:
<q>and shall not find me;</q>
though in the sense of not
finding Him any longer visibly
present among them, the
words were true even in reference
to the Apostles.
</p>

<anchor id='XIII_34'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>34. Mandatum novum do
vobis: ut diligatis invicem,
sicut dilexi vos, ut et vos diligatis
invicem.</cell>
<cell>34. A new commandment I
give unto you: That you love
one another, as I have loved
you, that you also love one
another.</cell></row></table>

<p>
34. Christ calls this commandment
a new one, because
though love of the neighbour
had been commanded in the
Law (Lev. xix. 18), yet love
modelled on the love of Christ
as its exemplar, Christian love,
had never been commanded
before. The words: <hi rend='bold'>As I have
loved you</hi>, imply that we should
love our neighbour with the
same kind of love, and from
the same motive, as Christ
loves us; but not, of course, in
the same measure, for of this
we are incapable.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>35. In hoc cognoscent omnes
quia discipuli mei estis, si dilectionem
habueritis ad invicem.</cell>
<cell>35. By this shall all men
know that you are my disciples,
if you have love one for another.</cell></row></table>

<p>
35. This mutual love was to
be a distinctive mark of Christ's
perfect disciples. And so, in
fact, it was in the early Church,
for Tertullian tells us that the
Pagans used to say: <q>See
how these Christians love one
another</q>!... <q>and how they
are ready to die for one
another</q>! (Apol. 39).
</p>

<anchor id='XIII_36'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>36. Dicit et Simon Petrus:
Domine, quo vadis? Respondit
Iesus: Quo ego vado, non potes
me modo sequi: sequeris autem
postea.</cell>
<cell>36. Simon Peter saith to
him: Lord whither goest thou?
Jesus answered: Whither I go,
thou canst not follow me now,
but thou shalt follow hereafter.</cell></row></table>

<p>
36. St. Peter, all absorbed
in Christ's words, (verse 33),
which signified that he was to
be separated from his Divine
Master, asks: <hi rend='bold'>Lord, whither
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
goest thou?</hi> Christ's reply
means that He was going
to His Father, whither Peter
should one day follow, though
he could not follow then. <hi rend='bold'>Thou
shalt follow hereafter.</hi> These
words implied Peter's final
perseverance and salvation.
</p>

<anchor id='XIII_37'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>37. Dicit ei Petrus: Quare
non possum te sequi modo?
animam meam pro te ponam.</cell>
<cell>37. Peter saith to him: Why
cannot I follow thee now? I
will lay down my life for thee.</cell></row></table>

<p>
37. St. Peter, not understanding
Christ's reply, and
thinking that He meant to go
to some place of danger, testifies
his readiness to die for
Christ, and hence, he implies,
to follow Him anywhere.
</p>

<anchor id='XIII_38'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>38. Respondit ei Iesus: Animam
tuam pro me pones?
Amen, amen dico tibi: non
cantabit gallus, donec ter me
neges.</cell>
<cell>38. Jesus answered him:
Wilt thou lay down thy life for
me? Amen, amen, I say to
thee, the cock shall not crow,
till thou deny me thrice.</cell></row></table>

<p>
38. Christ replies, rebuking
Peter's boastful confidence, and
declaring that so far was Peter
from being ready at that time
to die for Him, that before
cockcrow he would deny Him
thrice.
</p>

<p>
We believe that our Lord
<emph>twice</emph> on this night predicted the
denials by Peter: once in the
supper-room, as recorded by
St. John here, and by St. Luke
(xxii. 34), and again on the way
to Gethsemane, as recorded by
St. Matt. (xxvi. 30-34), and
St. Mark (xiv. 26-30). By the
latter Evangelists the prophecy
of Peter's denial is distinctly
placed on the way to Gethsemane,
and connected with
the prophecy of the general
desertion of the Apostles. This
latter prophecy, it may well
be, called forth from Peter
a second expression of his
fearless attachment to his
Master, and this was followed
in turn by a second reference
to Peter's denials.
</p>

<p>
While the other three Evangelists
represent our Lord as
saying that the three denials
by Peter should take place
before the cock would crow,
St. Mark, who was a disciple
of St. Peter, records the prediction
more minutely, and represents
our Lord as saying:
<q>Before the cock crow <emph>twice</emph>,
thou shalt deny me thrice</q>
(Mark xiv. 30). There is,
however, no contradiction
between St. Mark and the
others, even if all refer to
the same prediction; for the
<emph>second</emph> crowing of the cock,
before which, according to
St. Mark, the three denials
were to take place, is that
which is meant by the other
Evangelists, and which was
universally known as <q><emph>the</emph>
cockcrowing.</q> That the cockcrowing
in our Lord's time
was regarded as so distinct a
note of time as to have given
its name to one of the four
watches of the night, we have
clear evidence in the Gospels.
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
Thus, in St. Mark (xiii. 35),
our Lord says: <q>Watch ye
therefore (for you know not
when the lord of the house
cometh; at even, or at midnight,
<emph>or at the cockcrowing</emph>, or
in the morning).</q> Thus, then,
although the cock crew after
Peter's <emph>first</emph> denial, as St. Mark
records (Mark xiv. 68), still
the time generally known as
cockcrow&mdash;about 3 a.m.&mdash;was
that meant when the word was
used, as it is in our Lord's
prediction in SS. Matt., Luke,
and John, without any special
indication that the first
crowing of the cock was the
one intended. Hence, the
<emph>second</emph> crowing of the cock
referred to by St. Mark
was <emph>the</emph> cock-crowing mentioned
by the other three
Evangelists.
</p>

<p>
Before quitting this chapter,
it may be well, for
clearness sake, to repeat
here what we consider to
be the most probable order
of events at the Last Supper.
</p>

<p>
(1) There was the Paschal
Supper.
</p>

<p>
(2) During the Paschal Supper,
or at its close (but certainly
before the ordinary supper was
over: see above on verse 2),
the washing of the feet, accompanied
by the first allusion to
the traitor (John xiii. 10).
</p>

<p>
(3) The ordinary supper,
during which
</p>

<p>
(4) Another reference to the
traitor (Matt. xxvi. 21 <hi rend='italic'>ff.</hi>; and
Mark xiv. 18 <hi rend='italic'>ff.</hi>).
</p>

<p>
(5) The Eucharistic Supper.
</p>

<p>
(6) A third reference to the
traitor (Luke xxii. 21).
</p>

<p>
(7) The strife among the
Apostles as to which of them
was the greatest, occasioned,
perhaps, by the anxiety of each
to shift from himself the charge
of treachery.
</p>

<p>
(8) The question of St. John
(John xiii. 25), and the final
disclosure of the traitor, who
quits the supper room.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIV.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-4. <hi rend='bold'>Christ bids the Apostles not to be troubled in heart, and puts
before them three motives of consolation.</hi>
</p>

<p>
5-7. <hi rend='bold'>Interrupted by Thomas He declares Himself to be</hi> <hi rend='italic'>the way</hi>, <hi rend='bold'>and
His Father</hi> <hi rend='italic'>the term</hi> <hi rend='bold'>whither He goeth</hi>.
</p>

<p>
8-12<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>. <hi rend='bold'>Philip's request, and Christ's reply containing a fourth motive
of consolation.</hi>
</p>

<p>
12<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>-14. <hi rend='bold'>All who have the requisite faith shall perform even greater
miracles than His, for whatever they shall ask the Father or
Himself in His name, He will grant.</hi>
</p>

<p>
15-17. <hi rend='bold'>As a fifth motive of consolation, He promises to send them the
Holy Ghost.</hi>
</p>

<p>
18-21. <hi rend='bold'>As a sixth motive, He promises to come to them Himself.</hi>
</p>

<p>
22-24. <hi rend='bold'>Not only to them but to all the faithful shall He come together
with the Father and the Holy Ghost.</hi>
</p>

<p>
25-26. <hi rend='bold'>As a seventh motive, He tells them that the Holy Ghost will teach
them all truth, and call to their minds all He has said to them.</hi>
</p>

<p>
27. <hi rend='bold'>As an eighth motive, He bequeathes them His peace.</hi>
</p>

<p>
28. <hi rend='bold'>Finally, as a ninth, He tells them that to leave them and go to
the Father is for His greater glory.</hi>
</p>

<p>
29. <hi rend='bold'>His object in foretelling His departure and return.</hi>
</p>

<p>
30-31. <hi rend='bold'>He declares the approach of Satan, and invites the Apostles to
quit the Supper-room.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<anchor id='XIV_1'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Non turbetur cor vestrum.
Creditis in Deum, et in me
credite.</cell>
<cell>1. Let not your heart be
troubled. You believe in God,
believe also in me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. <hi rend='bold'>Let not your heart be
troubled.</hi> Continuing the
discourse after the Last
Supper, begun in xiii. 31, Jesus
begins to console the Apostles.
He saw that they were sore at
heart, as well they might be, on
account of what He had foretold
that night&mdash;the treachery
of one of their number, the
denials of another, and His
own departure whither they
could not follow.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>You believe in God, believe
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
also in me</hi>; that is, believe Me
also to be God, who can therefore
overcome all My enemies,
and make you victorious over
yours. Instead of <q>you believe</q>
we have in the Greek πιστεύετε,
which by its form might be
either an indicative or imperative,
but is more probably an
indicative, because it is not
likely that Christ thought it
necessary to exhort the Apostles
to believe in God, a thing that
every Jew did.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. In domo Patris mei mansiones
multae sunt; si quo
minus, dixissem vobis: quia
vado parare vobis locum.</cell>
<cell>2. In my Father's house
there are many mansions. If
not, I would have told you,
that I go to prepare a place
for you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. <hi rend='bold'>In my Father's house
there are many mansions.</hi>
Here He puts before them the
<emph>first</emph> motive of consolation;
namely, that there is room
for them as well as for Him
in heaven, in that house of
God, the eternal antitype
of the Jewish Temple (ii. 16),
wherein He exercised the rights
of a Son. <q>Mansions</q> renders
the Vulgate <q>mansiones,</q> which
were resting-places or stations
along the highways, where
travellers found refreshments.
The Greek word μονή is found
in the New Testament only
here and in verse 23.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>If not, I would have told
you that I go to prepare a
place for you.</hi> <emph>That</emph> (ὅτι,
Vulg., quia) is almost certainly
genuine,<note place='foot'>It is read by Lachm., Tisch., Tregel., Westc., and Hort, and by the
Revised Version as well as the Vulgate.</note> and hence we must
explain the text, retaining it,
though its presence creates
difficulty.
</p>

<p>
(1) Some explain thus.
If not, yet even in that case I
would have told you that I go
to prepare a place for you
(my intimate friends). And
if (in that case) I should go
to prepare a place you, I
would return, &amp;c. Against
this view, however, it is fairly
objected that Christ's going
is thus represented as purely
<emph>hypothetical</emph>, whereas from the
text it seems to be real: <q>And
if I shall go ... I will
come again.</q>
</p>

<p>
(2) Others thus: If not,
would I have told you that I go
to prepare a place for you? In
this view a note of interrogation
is supplied, a thing that
the original text, which was
unpointed, admits; and reference
is made to some past
occasion when He promised to
go and prepare places for them.
That we have no record of a
promise made in so many
words, does not prove, of
course, that it was not made.
</p>

<p>
(3) Others thus: If not, I
would have told you <emph>so. But,
in fact, there are many mansions</emph>,
for I go to prepare
a place for you. Against
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
this view it is objected
that it supplies an ellipsis,
which is in no way indicated in
the text. The same meaning,
however, may be had without
any ellipsis, if the words: <q>If
not, I would have told you</q>
be regarded as parenthetic.
The sense will then be: in My
Father's house there are many
mansions (if not, I would have
told you), as is proved by the
fact that I go to prepare a place
for you.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>To prepare a place.</hi> Christ
by his death, resurrection, and
ascension opened heaven, and
made ready a place for man.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Et si abiero, et praeparavero
vobis locum: iterum venio,
et accipiam vos ad meipsum,
ut ubi sum ego, et vos sitis.</cell>
<cell>3. And if I shall go, and
prepare a place for you: I
will come again, and will take
you to myself, that where I
am you also may be.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. <hi rend='bold'>I will come again.</hi> This
is a <emph>second</emph> motive of consolation.
There is a difference of
opinion as to what coming of
Christ is meant. Some understand
of His coming at the
death of each and the particular
judgment; others, of
His coming at the general
judgment; and others, of
both. We prefer the last
opinion, for while Christ took
the souls of the Apostles to the
mansions of bliss at their particular
judgment, it is only at
the general judgment that He
will take their bodies and perfect
their felicity. The words
cannot refer to the continual
coming of Christ to the Church
through the Holy Ghost whom
He has sent; such a meaning
is excluded by the words that
follow: <q>And will take,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Et quo ego vado scitis, et
viam scitis.</cell>
<cell>4. And whither I go you
know, and the way you know.</cell></row></table>

<p>
4. And though you may
think that you know not
whither I go, nor the way
thereto, yet you know both.
For you know My Father to
whom I go, and you know Me,
the way that leads to Him.
This may be regarded as a
<emph>third</emph> motive of consolation.
</p>

<anchor id='XIV_5'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. Dicit ei Thomas: Domine,
nescimus quo vadis: et
quomodo possumus viam scire?</cell>
<cell>5. Thomas saith to him:
Lord, we know not whither
thou goest, and how can we
know the way?</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Dicit ei Iesus: Ego sum
via, et veritas, et vita, nemo
venit ad Patrem, nisi per me.</cell>
<cell>6. Jesus saith to him, I am
the way, and the truth, and
the life, no man cometh to the
Father but by me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
5, 6. St. Thomas interrupts,
and Jesus explains, pointing out
that He Himself is the way to
the Father.
</p>

<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>I am the way, and the
truth, and the life.</hi> Many
interpretations of these words
have been given. We believe
that the first clause: <q>I
am the way,</q> answers
Thomas' difficulty; but as
such a statement itself needed
explanation, the remaining
words <q>and the truth, and
the life,</q> are added to explain
how Christ is the way
namely, inasmuch as He is the
Truth, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the author of faith;
and the Life, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the author of
grace and of the supernatural
life of the soul. In this view
the phrase hebraizes, the first
<q>and</q> being explanatory: I
am the way, <emph>inasmuch as</emph> I am
the truth and the life. This
seems better than to hold with
SS. Augustine and Thomas
that Christ declares Himself
the way <emph>as man</emph>, the truth and
the life as God. St. Augustine's
words are: <q>Ipse igitur (vadit)
ad seipsum per seipsum.</q> But
the words that follow in this
verse: <q>No man cometh to
the Father but by me,</q> show
that the Father, and not Christ
as God, is the term to which
the way in question leads.
</p>

<anchor id='XIV_7'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Si cognovissetis me, et
Patrem meum utique cognovissetis:
et amodo cognoscetis
eum, et vidistis eum.</cell>
<cell>7. If you had known me,
you would without doubt have
known my Father also; and
from henceforth you shall
know him, and you have seen
him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. Having told them that
He Himself is the way, He
now proceeds to point out to
them that if they had known
this way in the manner they
ought, they should also have
known the term towards which
it led. Hence the sense is:
You would know the Father to
whom I go, if you knew Me;
for I and the Father are the
same divine substance (John <ref target='X_29'>x.
30</ref>). Thomas had said that they
did not know the term of Christ's
journey, and therefore could
not know the way thereto, implying
that the way was to be
known from, or at least after,
the term to which it led.
Christ now declares that the
reverse is the case; and if they
had known Him, the way, they
should also have known the
Father. The words: <hi rend='bold'>If you
had known me</hi>, imply that they
had not yet known Christ as
they ought. They had indeed
known Him to some extent as He
admits in verse 4, but they had
not realized fully His Divinity
and consubstantiality with the
Father, else they would have
implicitly known the Father in
knowing Him. <hi rend='bold'>And from
henceforth you shall know
him, and you have seen him.</hi>
We would render the Greek
thus: <q>And <emph>even now</emph> (see John
<ref target='XIII_19'>xiii. 19</ref>) you know Him, and
you have seen Him.</q> The sense
is, that even now they knew the
Father in some way through
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
their imperfect knowledge of
Christ, and they had seen Him
in seeing Christ, because, as
Christ adds in verse 9: <q>He
who seeth me, seeth the Father
also.</q> Thus it was true that in
an imperfect manner they knew
whither Christ went, and the
way thereto (verse 4), yet
equally true that they knew
neither way nor term so clearly
as they might, considering that
He had now for more than
three years been gradually revealing
Himself to them.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>8. Dicit ei Philippus: Domine,
ostende nobis Patrem, et
sufficit nobis.</cell>
<cell>8. Philip saith to him: Lord
show us the Father, and it is
enough for us.</cell></row></table>

<p>
8. Thomas is silenced, but
Philip now interposes, and failing
to understand Christ's
statement that they had seen
the Father, asks Him to show
them the Father, probably in
some visible form, and then they
will ask no more.
</p>

<anchor id='XIV_9'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>9. Dicit ei Iesus: Tanto tempore
vobiscum sum: et non
cognovistis me? Philippe, qui
videt me, videt et Patrem.
Quomodo tu dicis: Ostende
nobis Patrem?</cell>
<cell>9. Jesus saith to him:. So
long a time have I been with
you: and have you not known
me? Philip, he that seeth me
seeth the Father also. How
sayest thou, show us the
Father.</cell></row></table>

<p>
9. Christ replies, again insisting
on His consubstantiality
with the Father: <hi rend='bold'>He that seeth
me, seeth the Father also</hi>
(<q>also</q> is probably not genuine.)
These words prove
clearly, against the Arians,
Christ's consubstantiality, or
unity of nature, with the
Father; otherwise in seeing Him
they could not be said to see
the Father even implicitly. Yet
it is clear against the Sabellians
that the Father and the Son
are distinct Persons, for Christ
plainly distinguishes Himself
from the Father in verse 6 where
He says <q>No man cometh to
the Father but by me;</q> and
again in verse 13, where He
says that He goes to the
Father. There is, then, identity
of nature, but distinction of
Persons. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cognovistis</foreign> of the
Vulgate ought to be <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cognovisti</foreign>,
Philip being addressed.
</p>

<anchor id='XIV_10'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>10. Non creditis quia ego in
Patre, et Pater in me est?
Verba quae ego loquor vobis,
a meipso non loquor. Pater
autem in me manens, ipse facit
opera.</cell>
<cell>10. Do you not believe
that I am in the Father, and
the Father in me? The words
that I speak to you, I speak
not of myself. But the Father
who abideth in me, he doth
the works.</cell></row></table>

<p>
10. <hi rend='bold'>Do you not believe</hi> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>creditis</foreign>
ought to be <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>credis</foreign>) <hi rend='bold'>that
I am in the Father and the
Father in me</hi>? He who saw
Christ saw the Father implicitly,
in virtue of the unity of nature.
The words, and the connection
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
with verse 9, show clearly that
such is the identity of nature
in the Father and the Son that
He who sees the Son, thereby
in some sense sees the Father
also. <q>Hoc autem quod dicit,</q>
says St. Thomas on this verse,
<q><q>Ego in Patre et Pater in me
est,</q> dicitur propter essentiae
unitatem, de qua dicitur supra
x. 30. <q>Ego et Pater unum
sumus.</q> Sciendum est enim,
quod essentia aliter se habet in
divinis ad personam, et aliter
in hominibus. Nam in hominibus
essentia Socratis non est
Socrates, quia Socrates est quid
compositum, sed in divinis essentia
est idem personae secundum
rem, et sic essentia Patris
est Pater, et essentia Filii,
Filius. Ubicumque ergo est
essentia Patris, est ipse Pater, et
ubicumque est essentia Filii,
est ipse Filius. Essentia autem
Patris est in Filio et essentia
Filii est in Patre. Ergo Filius
est in Patre, et Pater in Filio.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then He goes on to prove
that the Father is in Him, and
He in the Father, from the fact
that His words and works are
the words and works of the
Father. Instead of <q>the works</q>
many authorities read <q>His
works;</q> but the sense is the
same, for the works were both
Christ's and the Father's.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. Non creditis quia ego in
Patre, et Pater in me est?</cell>
<cell>11. Believe you not that I
am in the Father, and the
Father in me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
11. According to the Vulgate
reading, Christ, for emphasis,
repeats the question of verse 10.
In the original there is not a
question, but simply an injunction
addressed to all the
Apostles; <q>Believe me that I
am in the Father, and the
Father in me.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Alioquin propter opera
ipsa credite. Amen, amen dico
vobis, qui credit in me, opera
quae ego facio et ipse faciet, et
maiora horum faciet, quia ego
ad Patrem vado.</cell>
<cell>12. Otherwise believe for
the very works' sake. Amen,
amen, I say to you, he that
believeth in me, the works
that I do, he also shall do,
and greater than these shall
he do.</cell></row></table>

<p>
12. The sense is: But if My
testimony does not suffice to
satisfy you of My Divinity, at
least believe on account of My
miracles.
</p>

<p>
Having thus replied to the interruptions
of Thomas and Philip
He now proceeds to put before
the Apostles other motives of
consolation. The mention of
the <emph>fourth</emph> motive opens with
the solemn <q>Amen, amen;</q>
and the Apostles are told that
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
whoever believeth in Him shall
perform even greater miracles
than His (<q>majora horum</q> is
a Graecism for <q>majora his</q>),
the reason being that in
leaving His followers He bequeaths
to them His thaumaturgic
power, and bequeaths
it in great perfection, because
He ascends to the glory of the
Father.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Greater than these.</hi> The
miracles of Christ's followers
were greater than His in
their visible effects. <q>Evangelizantibus
discipulis ... gentes
etiam crediderunt;
haec sunt sine dubitatione
majora</q> (St. Aug. <hi rend='italic'>ad loc.</hi>). We
think it very probable that
the charism of miracles is here
promised not merely to the
Apostles, but <emph>to the Church</emph>, in
which it still resides; for it is
promised to whoever believeth.
Of course, not every faith is
sufficient that we may work
miracles; a specially strong,
unwavering faith is necessary.
See Matt. xxi. 21.
</p>

<anchor id='XIV_13'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>13. Et quodcumque petieritis
Patrem in nomine meo,
hoc faciam: ut glorificetur
Pater in Filio.</cell>
<cell>13. Because I go to the
Father: and whatsoever you
shall ask the Father in my
name, that will I do: that
the Father may be glorified in
the Son.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. In the Vulgate the
words: <q>Because I go to the
Father,</q> are rightly connected
with the preceding, and form
portion of verse 12.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And whatsoever you shall
ask the Father.</hi> The words
<q>the Father</q> are probably
not genuine, but they indicate
the sense. For it is by the
Son's doing what is asked of
the Father that the Father is
glorified in the Son.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>In my name</hi> (ἐν τῷ ὀνόματί
μου). This phrase occurs here
for the first time in this Gospel.
Compare the phrase <q>in the
name of my Father,</q> v. 43;
x. 25; xvii. 6; 11, 12, 26, and
the words of the Evangelist
i. 12; ii. 23; iii, 18. The
phrase before us occurs again
in xiv. 26; xv. 16; xvi. 23;
xvi. 24; and xvi. 26. See also
Acts iii. 6; iv. 10, 12. In the
present verse, and wherever
there is question of asking,
it seems to mean: <emph>while invoking
with faith the name of
Christ</emph>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Si quid petieritis me in
nomine meo, hoc faciam.</cell>
<cell>14. If you shall ask me anything
in my name, that I will
do.</cell></row></table>

<p>
14. Moreover, whatsoever
miracle they shall ask of Himself,
in His own name (and, of
course, with the requisite
faith), that He will perform.
We incline to the view that
in verses 13 and 14 there is
question <emph>primarily</emph> of miracles;
but the expression <q>si quid</q>
(ἐάν τι) is so general, that we
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
would not limit the promise,
but are inclined to believe
that it proves the efficacy of
all prayer of supplication offered
with the proper dispositions.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>15. Si diligitis me, mandata
mea servate.</cell>
<cell>15. If you love me keep my
commandments.</cell></row></table>

<p>
15. Now begins the promise
of the Holy Ghost&mdash;the <emph>fifth</emph>
and greatest motive of consolation.
But first in this
verse, He requires as a condition
that they should prove
the love they protested by
keeping His commandments;
for, as St. Gregory says,
<q>Love is proved by deeds.</q>
</p>

<anchor id='XIV_16'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Et ego rogabo Patrem,
et alium Paraclitum dabit
vobis, ut maneat vobiscum
in aeternum.</cell>
<cell>16. And I will ask the
Father, and he shall give you
another Paraclete, that he
may abide with you for ever.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. <q>Paraclitus</q><note place='foot'>The quantity of the third syllable in this word varies. Strictly it
ought to be long, the word being derived from the Greek παράκλητος; but in
ecclesiastical Latin it is generally short, and spelled with <hi rend='italic'>i</hi> instead of <hi rend='italic'>e</hi>, as
in the <hi rend='italic'>Veni Creator</hi>: Qui diceris Paraclitus.</note> may
mean comforter, advocate, or
helper. Bearing in mind the
tribulations in which the
Apostles were already, and
the still greater ones that
awaited them, we think the
principal meaning here is that
of comforter. But this does
not exclude the other meanings,
especially that of helper, which
the Holy Ghost undoubtedly
was in an eminent degree.
This other Comforter, who is
promised in Christ's stead,
will not leave the Apostles, as
Christ did, but is to remain
with them for ever. It is
disputed whether the Holy
Ghost is here promised only
to the Apostles, or, in them,
to the whole teaching Church.
In the first case, <q>for ever,</q>
would mean during their lives;
in the second, it would mean
till the end of the world, as
long as the Church shall
endure. This latter sense we
prefer, for&mdash;(1) the words <q>for
ever</q> favour this view; (2)
though the Apostles needed a
comforter, yet not they only,
but their successors quite as
much; (3) this spirit is
promised to teach them all
truth (John <ref target='XVI_13'>xvi. 13</ref>); why, except
in order that they through
themselves <emph>and their successors</emph>
might teach the world? (4) we
know from the event that on
the day of Pentecost the Holy
Ghost came not to the Apostles
alone (Acts ii. 4). We hold
then that the Holy Ghost is
here promised to the <hi rend='italic'>Ecclesia
docens</hi>, represented by the
Apostles, to abide with her for
ever.
</p>

<p>
In either interpretation it
cannot be proved from this
text that the Apostles were to
be confirmed in grace after the
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
descent of the Holy Ghost, for
it is enough for the fulfilment
of the promise here made that
the Holy Ghost was to be, as
far as in Him lay, an enduring
Comforter, though the Apostles,
on their part, might expel
and banish Him. This verse
proves the personality of the
Holy Ghost, for He is sent in
the place of Christ (see also
verse 26). It proves also His
Divinity, for only a Divine
Person would be thus compared
to Christ, and spoken of as
<emph>another</emph> Comforter. Moreover
the procession of the Holy
Ghost from the Father is here
implied in the fact that the
Father is said to send the
Holy Ghost. For the sending
of one Divine Person by
another, implies the Eternal
Procession of one from the
other with a relation to some
term in time.<note place='foot'><q>Ex dictis colligitur duo ad missionem proprie dictam concurrere,
alterum, sempiternam processionem personae, quae mittitur; alterum,
externam aliquam efficientiam, sive sub sensus incidat, ut cum, homine
suscepto. Verbum hominibus apparuit, aut sub columbae specie Spiritus
Sanctus, sive interius sit nec aspectabile quod agitur, ut cum Spiritus S. ad
fidelium quemque demittitur.</q>&mdash;Perrone, <hi rend='italic'>De Trin.</hi>, cap. vi., Scholion 4, note 3.</note> Finally, the
three Persons of the Trinity
are shown to be distinct, for
the Father will send the Holy
Ghost at the request of the
Son.
</p>

<anchor id='XIV_17'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Spiritum veritatis, quem
mundus non potest accipere,
quia non videt eum, nec scit
eum: vos autem cognoscetis
eum, quia apud vos manebit, et
in vobis erit.</cell>
<cell>17. The Spirit of truth,
whom the world cannot receive,
because it seeth him not, nor
knoweth him: but you shall
know him; because he shall
abide with you, and shall be
in you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17. <hi rend='bold'>The Spirit of truth.</hi>
The Holy Ghost is so called
not only because He is essential
Truth, but also because He
was to come to the Apostles
as a teacher of truth (verse 26).
</p>

<p>
In the following words the
Apostles are told that the
wicked world (i. 10; xiv. 30;
xvii. 9, 16) cannot receive the
Holy Ghost, for as St. Paul
says: <q>the sensual man
perceiveth not these things
that are of the Spirit of God;
for it is foolishness to him,
and he cannot understand:
because it is spiritually examined</q>
(1 Cor. ii. 14).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>It seeth him not, nor
knoweth him.</hi> Some take
the meaning to be: seeth
Him not with the eyes of the
body, nor discerneth Him by
spiritual vision; others, and
with more probability, take
both clauses as synonymous
and in reference to spiritual
vision. The sense is that because
the wicked world will
refuse to recognise the Holy
Ghost, it will be incapable of
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
receiving Him at His coming.
Want of vision shall be a
hindrance to possession.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>But you shall know him;
because he shall abide with
you, and shall be in you.</hi>
Reversing the order of thought,
He now says that the presence
of the Holy Ghost abiding in the
Apostles shall bring them still
fuller knowledge. Such seems
to be the sense of the verse
according to the Vulgate
reading. But in the latter
part of the verse, instead of
<q>shall know</q> and <q>shall
abide,</q> we have in both
instances the present tense in
the Greek, and many authorities
also read the present
instead of <q>shall be.</q> The
clause would then run: <q>but
you know him because he
abides with you and is in you.</q>
</p>

<p>
But even in this reading the
present may stand for the
future, and the meaning will
be the same as in the Vulgate.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Non relinquam vos orphanos:
veniam ad vos.</cell>
<cell>18. I will not leave you
orphans, I will come to you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. As a <emph>sixth</emph> motive of consolation,
He tells them that
He will come again to them
Himself. Already indeed he
had spoken of His coming to
them, and had put it forward
as a motive of consolation
(verse 3), but the coming there
meant we take to be different
from that now referred to, and
hence a new motive of consolation
is now put forward in the
coming promised here.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>I will come</hi> (ἔρχομαί) <hi rend='bold'>to you</hi>.
There are various views as to
what coming of Christ is here
promised.
</p>

<p>
(1) Some hold that the
reference is to the coming
after His resurrection when
we know He appeared to the
Apostles but was unseen by
the world. So St. Chrys., St.
Thom., Patriz., &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
(2) Others hold that there is
question of the coming at the
Day of Judgment. As the
years are measured before
God, only <q>a little while</q>
shall elapse till then, and it is
only after the Day of Judgment
that the promise of verse 20:
<q>In that day you shall know
that I am in my Father, and
you in me, and I in you</q>
shall be fully realized. So St.
Aug., Mald., &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
(3) Others understand of the
coming of Christ in and with
the Holy Ghost on the day of
Pentecost. If the consubstantiality
and circumincession of the
three Divine Persons be borne
in mind, the whole passage
that follows as far as verse 24,
will then be naturally explained.
So St. Cyril, Beel., Bisp., &amp;c.
We prefer the last view, and
hold that from 15-24, there is
question of the coming of the
Holy Ghost, first in reference
to the Apostles (15-20), and
then in reference to the faithful
generally (21-24). In reference
to the Apostles, the coming of
the Holy Ghost is first considered
in itself (15-17), and
next, for their consolation, as
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
implying and including the
coming of Christ Himself (18-20).
</p>

<p>
Though this view may at
first sight seem forced, we
believe that if the connection
in the passage be followed
closely, it must appear the
most probable. For when
St. Jude, alluding to the words
of verse 19, asks, in verse 22,
how Christ shall be seen by
the Apostles, yet unseen by
the world, Christ's reply, in
verse 23, goes to show that
the vision is spiritual, and such
as is explained by the fact,
that He and His Father will
come and make their abode
in those that love Him.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Adhuc modicum, et mundus
me iam non videt. Vos
autem videtis me, quia ego
vivo, et vos vivetis.</cell>
<cell>19. Yet a little while: and
the world seeth me no more.
But you see me: because I
live, and you shall live.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. <hi rend='bold'>Yet a little while.</hi>
This we understand of the few
hours that remained till His
death. After that, the world
should see Him no longer.
But, He adds, you shall see
Me (present for future); not,
indeed, with the eyes of the
body, but with those of the
soul; because I live (the
present being used, perhaps,
of His Divine life, in virtue of
which He was to resume the
life of the body), and you shall
live the life of grace, which
will be rewarded by the vision
of Me.
</p>

<p>
Thus he tells them that they
shall live a spiritual life, a
kind of participation in His
own glorious life (<ref target='VI_56'>vi. 57</ref>), and
that for this reason they
shall be privileged to see Him
spiritually. That there is
question of spiritual vision, is
proved, we believe, from what
follows; for they shall see
according as He shall manifest
Himself (verse 21); and this
manifestation of Himself He
explains in verse 23 of His
abiding in them.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. In illo die vos cognoscetis
quia ego sum in Patre
meo, et vos in me, et ego in
vobis.</cell>
<cell>20. In that day you shall
know that I am in my Father,
and you in me, and I in you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
20. In that time, after I have
come to you at Pentecost
(together with the Holy Ghost),
you shall know clearly that I
am in My Father, that I am
God, and that you are in Me
as its branches in the vine (see
below, <ref target='XV_2'>xv. 2</ref>), deriving all your
spiritual life from Me, and I in
you by a <emph>special indwelling</emph>
enjoyed only by the just. See
above on <ref target='VII_39'>vii. 39</ref>. If there be
a comparison here between the
mutual indwelling of the Father
and Son on the one hand, and
that of Christ and the just on
the other, it is plain that the
likeness is only imperfect and
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
analogical. Yet such texts as
this (see also <ref target='VI_58'>vi. 58</ref>; xvii. <ref target='XVII_21'>21</ref>,
<ref target='XVII_23'>23</ref>), even when we make all
necessary allowance for the
imperfection of the likeness,
prove clearly how marvellously
intimate and sacred is the
union that exists between
Christ and the souls of the
just.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>21. Qui habet mandata mea,
et servat ea, ille est, qui diligit
me. Qui autem diligit me,
diligetur a Patre meo: et ego
diligam eum, et manifestab o ei
meipsum.</cell>
<cell>21. He that hath my commandments,
and keepeth them:
he it is that loveth me. And
he that loveth me, shall be
loved of my Father: and I
will love him, and will manifest
myself to him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
21. <hi rend='bold'>He that hath</hi> (ὁ ἔχων)
<hi rend='bold'>my commandments, and
keepeth them</hi>, &amp;c. Not only
to the Apostles, but to all that
love Him, Christ will manifest
Himself, for in and with the
Holy Ghost He and His Father
will come and abide in them.
</p>

<anchor id='XIV_22'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Dicit ei Iudas, non ille
Iscariotes: Domine, quid factum
est quia manifestaturus es
nobis teipsum, et non mundo?</cell>
<cell>22. Judas saith to him, not
the Iscariot: Lord, how is it,
that thou wilt manifest thyself
to us, and not to the world?</cell></row>
<row><cell>23. Respondit Iesus, et dixit
ei: Si quis diligit me, sermonem
meum servabit, et Pater
meus diliget eum, et ad eum
veniemus, et mansionem apud
eum faciemus:</cell>
<cell>23. Jesus answered, and
said to him: If any one love
me, he will keep my word, and
my Father will love him, and
we will come to him, and will
make our abode with him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
22-23. Asked by the Apostle
Jude, brother to James the
Less, who was also called
Thaddeus, how He would
manifest Himself to the
Apostles, yet be unseen by
the world, Christ replies that
He will come and dwell in all
that love Him, and thus manifest
Himself, and be seen by
them in a spiritual manner.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Qui non diligit me, sermones
meos non servat. Et
sermonem quem audistis, non
est meus: sed ejus qui misit
me, Patris.</cell>
<cell>24. He that loveth me not,
keepeth not my words. And
the word which you have
heard is not mine; but the
Father's who sent me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. He had just said that
those who love Him will keep
His words and obey them, and
now He adds that those who
do not love Him will not keep
His words. The reason why
He here insists upon this
observance of His words is,
that such observance is
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
necessary, before He will
manifest Himself and make
His abode in any heart. For,
as is clear from verse 21,
Christ will manifest Himself
only to those who are loved by
the Father; but they alone
are loved by the Father who
love Christ, and they alone
love Christ who keep His
commandments (verse 23).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And the word which you
have heard</hi>, &amp;c. <q>Sermonem</q>
(Vulg.) ought to be <q>sermo,</q>
and the verb in the original is
in the present (ἀκούετε). The
sense, therefore, is: the words
which you are <emph>wont to hear</emph>
from Me are not Mine alone,
but the Father's also who sent
Me. <hi rend='bold'>Is not mine, but the
Father's who sent me.</hi> This
form of expression, which
seems to declare that the
words are in no way
Christ's, is a Hebraism, and
means that they are not His
alone. See above on <ref target='VII_16'>vii. 16</ref>.
Of course the authority of
Christ's words was equal in
every way to that of the
Father's, but since the Apostles
did not yet fully realize His
Divinity with all that it implied,
He invokes the
Father's authority as having
more weight with them.
</p>

<anchor id='XIV_25'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Haec locutus sum vobis,
apud vos manens.</cell>
<cell>25. These things have I
spoken to you, abiding with you.</cell></row>
<row><cell>26. Paraclitus autem Spiritus
sanctus, quem mittet Pater in
nomine meo, ille vos docebit
omnia, et suggeret vobis vobis
omnia, quaecumque dixero
vobis.</cell>
<cell>26. But the Paraclete, the
Holy Ghost, whom the Father
will send in my name, he will
teach you all things, and bring
all things to your mind, whatsoever
I shall have said to you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
25, 26. These things I have
spoken to you while remaining
with you; and if you fail to
fully understand them, yet be
consoled with My assurance
that the Comforter, the Holy
Ghost, whom the Father will
send in My name, He will teach
you all that you need know,
and <emph>recall to your minds</emph>
(ὑπομνήσει) all that I <emph>said</emph> (εἰπον)
to you. This may be regarded
as the <emph>seventh</emph> motive of consolation.
</p>

<p>
Here again, as in verse 16, we
have mention of three distinct
Persons: the Holy Ghost is to
be sent by the Father in the
name of the Son. And, as we
remarked on verse 16, the fact
that the Holy Ghost is to be
sent by the Father, proves His
procession from the Father.
</p>

<p>
The Holy Ghost is said to be
sent <emph>in Christ's name</emph>, most
probably because He was sent
in the place of Christ, another
Comforter and Helper, to console
the Apostles and carry on
the work begun by Christ.
</p>

<p>
The infallible teaching authority
of the <emph>Apostles</emph> follows from
the fact that they were to be
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
taught by the Holy Ghost, the
spirit of truth (verse 17). And
since they were endowed with
this infallible teaching authority
in order that they might teach
the flock of Christ (xv. 16);
since, moreover, there is still
the same need for an infallible
teaching authority in the
Church, if the work of Christ
and His Apostles is to be
continued without danger of
failure, we are warranted in
concluding that an infallible
teaching authority still resides
in the <emph>Church</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Hence, to use Christ's own
words: <q>The gates of hell
shall not prevail against her</q>
(Matt. xvi. 18), because in her
<emph>office of teacher</emph> she has Christ
with her, all days, even, to the
consummation of the world.
<q>Euntes ... <emph>docete ... et
ecce</emph> ego vobiscum sum omnibus
diebus usque ad consummationem
saeculi</q> (Matt.
xxviii. 19, 20).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>27. Pacem relinquo vobis,
pacem meam do vobis: non
quomodo mundus dat, ego do
vobis. Non turbetur cor vestrum,
neque formidet.</cell>
<cell>27. Peace I leave with you,
my peace I give unto you: not
as the world giveth, do I give
unto you. Let not your heart
be troubled, nor let it be afraid.</cell></row></table>

<p>
27. As the <emph>eighth</emph> motive of
consolation, Christ gives the
Apostles His peace. Among
the Jews it was customary for
the people to salute and take
leave of one another by wishing
one another peace. Christ here
says that His words are not a
mere wish or empty formula;
with Him to wish peace was to
confer it, and that in a true
and lasting manner.
</p>

<anchor id='XIV_28'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>28. Audistis quia ego dixi
vobis: Vado et venio ad vos.
Si diligeretis me, gauderetis
utique, quia vado ad Patrem:
quia Pater maior me est.</cell>
<cell>28. You have heard that I
said to you: I go away and I
come unto you. If you loved
me, you would indeed be glad,
because I go to the Father:
for the Father is greater
than I.</cell></row></table>

<p>
28. <hi rend='bold'>You would indeed be
glad, because I go to the
Father.</hi> <q>Naturae humanae
gratulandum est, eo quod sic
assumpta est a Verbo unigenito,
ut immortalis constitueretur
in coelo, atque ita
fieret terra sublimis, ut incorruptibilis
pulvis sederet ad
dexteram Patris.</q> (St. Aug. <hi rend='italic'>in
loc.</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>For the Father is greater
than I.</hi> These words have been
variously explained. We would
interpret either with St. Chrys.:
For the Father is greater than
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
I, <emph>in your estimation</emph>; or better
still: For the Father is greater
than I <emph>as man</emph>. Hence, since
by His going to the Father,
Christ's humanity was to share
in the glory of the Father, and
thus be exalted, they should
rejoice at His going, if they
really loved Him. This is the
<emph>ninth</emph> motive proposed for their
consolation.
</p>

<p>
The Arians triumphantly
pointed to the words: <q>The
Father is greater than I,</q> as a
proof of the inferiority of the
Son to the Father. But in
neither of the interpretations
which we have given of the
words, does the Arian heresy
find any support. And certainly
whatever be the correct
interpretation, Christ cannot,
without contradicting Himself,
mean that <emph>as God</emph> He is inferior
to the Father. For He had
already told them that He is in
the Father, and the Father in
Him (verse 10), and in the face
of His enemies He had proclaimed
that He and the Father
are one (John <ref target='X_29'>x. 30</ref>).
</p>

<anchor id='XIV_29'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>29. Et nunc dixi vobis priusquam
fiat: ut cum factum
fuerit, credatis.</cell>
<cell>29. And now I have told
you before it come to pass:
that when it shall come to
pass you may believe.</cell></row></table>

<p>
29. Not that they did not
believe His words beforehand:
but they would be strengthened
in their belief of all He had told
them, when they should see
fulfilled this special prediction
<emph>of His going away and returning</emph>
(verse 28).
</p>

<anchor id='XIV_30'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>30. Iam non multa loquar
vobiscum: venit enim princeps
mundi huius, et in me non
habet quidquam.</cell>
<cell>30. I will not now speak
many things with you. For
the prince of this world cometh,
and in me he hath not anything.</cell></row></table>

<p>
30. Satan who is here called
<hi rend='bold'>the prince of this</hi> (rather <emph>the</emph>)
<hi rend='bold'>world</hi> (see also <ref target='XII_31'>xii. 31</ref>, <ref target='XVI_8'>xvi. 11</ref>;
2 Cor. iv. 4; Eph. ii. 2, vi. 12),
and who was now urging on
Judas and the Jews to lay hands
on Christ, found nothing in
Christ in virtue of which Christ
could be in any way subjected
to him.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>In me he hath not anything.</hi>
From what we have
just said it will be seen that the
meaning is: he has no authority
over Me, no claim upon Me,
inasmuch as sin has never had
any share in Me.
</p>

<anchor id='XIV_31'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>31. Sed ut cognoscat mundus
quia diligo Patrem et sicut
mandatum dedit mihi Pater,
sic facio. Surgite, eamus hinc.</cell>
<cell>31. But that the world may
know that I love the Father:
and as the Father hath given
me commandment, so do I:
Arise, let us go hence.</cell></row></table>

<p>
31. Yet, to prove His love
for, and His obedience to, the
Father, He will submit to be
forthwith seized by the minions
of Satan. The construction of
this verse is not clear. The
first part may depend on the
last clause: arise, let us go
hence, that the world, &amp;c.,
or there may be ellipsis in the
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
opening words (comp. <ref target='IX_3'>ix. 3</ref>;
<ref target='XIII_18'>xiii. 18</ref>), the sense being: but
<emph>I deliver Myself to death</emph> that
the world, &amp;c. For explanation
of the words, <q>As the Father
hath given me commandment,</q>
see above on <ref target='X_18'>x. 18</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Arise, let us go hence.</hi>
We may reasonably conclude
that Jesus, accompanied by the
Apostles, now left the supper-room.
Had they not done so,
St. John would probably have
referred to the delay. Whether
they paused in a porch or court
of the house, or at some quiet
spot on the way, till the discourse
and prayer to the Father (xv.-xvii.)
were spoken, or proceeded
immediately through the city
towards the Garden of Olives,
and had arrived at the brook
of Cedron (John <ref target='XVIII_1'>xviii. 1</ref>), when
Christ concluded, is disputed.
Bearing in mind the crowded
condition of Jerusalem during
the Paschal week, and that
probably it was hardly yet 10
p.m., when the streets would
be still thronged with people,
we think it extremely unlikely
that such a discourse and
prayer, as are contained in
John xv.-xvii. 26, were spoken
while Christ and the Apostles
passed through the streets of
the city. We think it most
probable, then, that they paused
at some quiet spot on the outskirts
of the city, or in a porch
or court of the house where
they had supped.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XV.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-11. <hi rend='bold'>In a beautiful allegory, Christ declares the necessity of union
with Himself in order to a supernatural life.</hi>
</p>

<p>
12-17. <hi rend='bold'>He inculcates mutual love, proposing as a model His own love
for the Apostles&mdash;a love which made him ready to lay down
His life for them (13), and which was spontaneous (16).</hi>
</p>

<p>
18-25. <hi rend='bold'>He fortifies them against the world's hatred by reminding them
that it hated Himself, and so they shall only be treading in His
footsteps. He points out too how inexcusable is this attitude
of the world towards Himself and His followers.</hi>
</p>

<p>
26-27. <hi rend='bold'>He again promises the Holy Ghost, who together with the
Apostles, will bear testimony of Him.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<anchor id='XV_1'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Ego sum vitis vera:
et Pater meus agricola est.</cell>
<cell>1. I am the true vine; and
my Father is the husbandman.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. After they had left the
supper-room Christ again addresses
the Apostles. The fact
that the Evangelist gives the
discourse that follows without
any introductory remark, such
as: And Christ said, or: And
while they went Christ said&mdash;favours
the view that only a
slight break separated this
discourse from that recorded
in the preceding chapter. This
would, therefore, render it very
probable that what follows was
spoken in the vicinity of the
house in which they had supped
rather than on the outskirts of
the city.
</p>

<p>
As Christ was about to
leave His Apostles, He now
impresses upon them the
necessity of abiding in Him
by faith and love. For this
purpose He compares Himself
to the stem of the vine, and
the Apostles to its branches.
As the branches draw all their
life and nourishment from the
stem, so must the Apostles
draw all their spiritual life from
Him. This idea would be
illustrated by the relation between
the trunk of any tree
and its branches. The chief
reason, then, why He compares
Himself to the vine is because
it was customary to prune its
branches, and He was about
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
to speak of the pruning of
His mystical branches by the
Father.<note place='foot'>See also A Lap. <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>. Some who hold that this was spoken <emph>on the
way</emph> to Gethsemane, think that the mention of the vine was suggested by the
sight of a vine as Christ and the Apostles passed along.</note> He is <emph>the true</emph>, that
is the perfect vine, because He
nourishes His members more
perfectly than does any vine
tree its branches. In a similar
sense He is the true light
(John <ref target='I_7'>i. 9</ref>), and the true bread
(John <ref target='VI_32'>vi. 32</ref>).
</p>

<p>
<q>He is the <q>vine</q> in His
<emph>humanity</emph>, in which the branches
of the same nature are united
with Him. But it is from His
<emph>Divinity</emph> the branches derive
the spiritual and life-giving
influence that leads to eternal
happiness</q> (MacEv.)
</p>

<p>
It is needless to say, that in
calling Himself the true vine,
Christ does not mean to signify
that He is really a vine. The
language is plainly metaphorical,
and is so explained by our
Lord Himself in verses 4 and 5.
Hence it bears no comparison
with the words used by Christ
in instituting the Blessed
Eucharist. In the latter case
He declared that what He held
in His hands was His body,
and there was nothing in His
words, or in the circumstances
in which they were uttered to
point to a figurative sense. On
the contrary, His discourse
delivered twelve months beforehand
in the Synagogue of
Capharnaum, and recorded
in the sixth chapter of our
Gospel, prepared the Apostles
to receive His words, mysterious
though they must have
seemed, in the literal sense.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And my Father is the
husbandman.</hi> The Father
attends to and purifies Christ's
followers in a manner similar
to that employed by the vine-dresser,
that so they may produce
more abundant fruit. The
Arians appealed to this text to
show that Christ was inferior
to God. For as the vine and
the husbandman are not of the
same nature, so neither, they
said, are Christ and the Father
of the same nature. We answer
that in metaphorical
language the comparison is
not to be pressed too far, only
indeed in that particular, or in
regard to that point, for the
illustration of which the
metaphor is employed. See
above on <ref target='X_3'>x. 3</ref>. Now in the
present instance Christ points
out (in verse 4) that His metaphorical
language is designed
to show the necessity for the
Apostles of union with Himself.
Nothing therefore can
be inferred in regard to His
<emph>nature</emph> and the Father's. In
reality, Christ, <emph>as God</emph>, was
husbandman, as well as the
Father; but as it would not
suit the comparison to call
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
Himself both vine and husbandman,
He attributes the
office of husbandman to the
Father. <q>Numquid unum sunt
agricola et vitis? Secundum
hoc ergo vitis Christus, secundum
quod ait: Pater major me
est. Secundum autem id quod
ait: Ego et Pater unum sumus,
et ipse agricola est.</q> (St. Aug.)<note place='foot'>See Less. of Thir. Noct. Comm. Marty. (Temp. Pasch.)</note>
</p>

<anchor id='XV_2'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. Omnem palmitem in me
non ferentem fructum, tollet
eum: et omnem qui fert fructum,
purgabit eum, ut fructum
plus afferat.</cell>
<cell>2. Every branch in me, that
beareth not fruit, he will take
away: and every one that
beareth fruit he will purge it,
that it may bring forth more
fruit.</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. <hi rend='bold'>Every branch in me,
that beareth not fruit.</hi> From
this it follows that branches
may be unfruitful and yet
really remain branches, and
members of Christ's Church.
The sense of Christ's words is:
Every Christian that beareth
not the fruit of good works,
the Father <emph>takes</emph> away (Gr.
present), either in this life, by
permitting them to fall into
heresy, or at death when they
shall no longer remain members
of the Church. They are
therefore lopped off like useless
branches. The good, too,
are purified by the Father, who
<emph>prunes</emph> their hearts, removing
therefrom all impediments to
perfection, taking away everything
that would hinder or
impede the vital power in the
production of spiritual fruit.
As even the best branches are
improved by judicious pruning,
so the just are rendered more
perfect by the purifying action
of the Divine Husbandman.
Αὐτο in both cases is redundant.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Iam vos mundi estis
propter sermonem, quem locutus
sum vobis.</cell>
<cell>3. Now you are clean by
reason of the word which I
have spoken to you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. <hi rend='bold'>Now</hi> (already) <hi rend='bold'>you are
clean</hi>. The meaning is that
the Apostles were already
pruned, that the obstacles to
their spiritual growth had been
taken away by His words
addressed to them that night.
It is possible that, as some
think, there is reference to all
Christ's teaching; but we believe
there is at least <emph>special</emph>
reference to the discourse of
that last night. For He had
that night perfected their knowledge
(<ref target='XIV_5'>xiv. 6-11</ref>); guarded
them against an unavailing
sorrow (<ref target='XIV_1'>xiv. 1-2, &amp;c.</ref>); checked
the presumption of some (<ref target='XIII_38'>xiii.
38</ref>), and supplied motives to
confirm the faith of all (<ref target='XIV_29'>xiv. 29</ref>).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Manete in me: et ego in
vobis. Sicut palmes non potest
ferre fructum a semetipso,
nisi manserit in vite: sic nec
vos, nisi in me manseritis.</cell>
<cell>4. Abide in me: and I in
you. As the branch cannot
bear fruit of itself, unless it
abide in the vine, so neither
can you, unless you abide in
me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
4. <hi rend='bold'>Abide in me, and I in you.</hi>
The meaning is: take care that
ye abide in Me by faith and
love, and I will abide in you by
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
love and grace.<note place='foot'><q>Non eo modo illi in ipso, sicut ipse in illis. Utrumque autem prodest,
non ipsi, sed illis. Ita quippe in vite sunt palmites, ut viti non conferant, sed
inde accipiant unde vivant, ita vero vitis est in palmitibus, ut vitale alimentum
subministret eis, non sumat ab eis. Ac per hoc, et manentem in se habere
Christum et manere in Christo, discipulis prodest utrumque, non Christo.
Nam praeciso palmite potest de viva radice alius pullulare; qui autem praecisus
est, sine radice non potest vivere.</q>&mdash;St. Aug. <hi rend='italic'>in loc.</hi></note> Or it may be
that the last clause too is imperative
in conception: permit
me to abide in you. Since
they are exhorted to abide,
it follows that they were
free not to abide; and hence
it is possible, as the Council of
Trent defined (Sess. vi., Can.
23) to fall away from faith and
grace. <hi rend='bold'>Of itself</hi>&mdash;that is, as
the source of its vital energy.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. Ego sum vitis, vos palmites:
qui manet in me et ego
in eo, hic fert fructum multum:
quia sine me nihil potestis facere.</cell>
<cell>5. I am the vine; you the
branches: he that abideth in
me, and I in him, the same
beareth much fruit: for without
me you can do nothing.</cell></row></table>

<p>
5. The theme (verse 1) is
again repeated, and now there
is added the clause: <hi rend='bold'>Ye are
the branches</hi>, which definitely
sums up what was already
implied in the preceding
verses. <hi rend='bold'>For without me you
can do nothing.</hi> These words
show that, though as we have
seen in the preceding verse the
Apostles were free not to abide
in Him, they were not able of
themselves to abide in Him or
to bear any supernatural fruit
except through His grace. The
words refute the Pelagian and
Semipelagian heresies, for they
show that without the aid of
Christ's grace we are capable
of no supernatural good work.
<q>Sive ergo parum, sive multum,
sine illo fieri non potest, sine
quo nihil fieri potest</q> (St.
Aug. <hi rend='italic'>in loc.</hi>). It would be
difficult, we think, to prove
from this text by itself that
even where <emph>habitual</emph> grace is
present, <emph>actual</emph> grace is also
necessary in order to a salutary
work; but the traditional interpretation
given to this text
by the fathers forbids us to
doubt that the necessity of
actual grace also is here
revealed.
</p>

<p>
There is no question in this
text of the necessity of God's
concurrence in our <emph>natural</emph>
acts; the question is of Christ's
influx as mystic vine upon the
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
faithful who remain united to
Him as branches.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Si quis in me non manserit,
mittetur foras sicut palmes:
et arescet et colligent
eum, et in ignem mittent, et
ardet.</cell>
<cell>6. If any one abide not in
me: he shall be cast forth as
a branch, and shall wither,
and they shall gather him up,
and cast him into the fire, and
he burneth.</cell></row></table>

<p>
6. Observe the variety of
tense in the verbs of this verse
in the Greek text. <q>Sensus
est: Si quis in me non
manserit, jam eo ipso <emph>ejectus
est</emph> foras sicut palmes et <emph>exaruit</emph></q>
(Beel., <hi rend='italic'>Gr. Gram.</hi>, § 41,
5, b). The casting forth and
withering happen simultaneously
with the separation from
Christ. The words of the
verse indicate the punishment
which is in store for those who
die separated from Christ. In
the Greek we have αῦτὰ (ea)
instead of <q>eum</q> of the
Vulgate; and the sense, is
that as men usually gather up
the <emph>withered branches</emph> (αὐτα),
and fling them into the fire,
where they burn, so shall the
angels of God do to the sinner.
See Matt. xiii. 41.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Si manseritis in me, et
verba mea in vobis manserint:
quodcumque volueritis petetis,
et fiet vobis.</cell>
<cell>7. If you abide in me, and
my words abide in you, you
shall ask whatever you will,
and it shall be done unto you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. In contrast with the unhappy
condition of those
separated from Christ, they
who remain in Him by faith,
and keep His words through
charity working by faith, shall
obtain from God through
prayer whatever they ask,
provided it be necessary or
useful to their spiritual life.
<q>Whatsoever we shall ask according
to His will He heareth
us</q> (1 John v. 14).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>8. In hoc clarificatus est
Pater meus, ut fructum plurimum
afferatis, et efficiamini
mei discipuli.</cell>
<cell>8. In this is my Father
glorified; that you bring forth
very much fruit, and become
my disciples.</cell></row></table>

<p>
8. It is clear from these
words that the good works of
the just give glory to God.
Instead of <q>efficiamini,</q> the
more probable Greek reading
is γενήσεσθε (efficiemini), and
the meaning is; And so you
shall become more and more
My disciples.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>9. Sicut dilexit me Pater, et
ego dilexi vos. Manete in dilectione
mea.</cell>
<cell>9. As the Father hath loved
me, I also have loved you.
Abide in my love.</cell></row></table>

<p>
9. As (καθώς) expresses not
equality, but resemblance. The
resemblance consists in this,
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
that as the Father loved
Christ's humanity gratuitously,
without any previous merit on
its part, and united it with the
Person of the Word, so Christ
loved the disciples gratuitously,
and united them with Himself.
So Toletus, following St. Aug.
Then Christ adds as a practical
conclusion: Take care to
remain in the enjoyment of
that love of mine for you. Or
the meaning of the whole verse
according to the Greek text
may be: as the Father hath
loved Me, and as I have loved
you, so abide ye in the enjoyment
of that love of Mine for
you.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>10. Si praecepta mea servaveritis,
manebitis in dilectione
mea, sicut et ego Patris mei
praecepta servavi, et maneo in
eius dilectione.</cell>
<cell>10. If you keep my commandments,
you shall abide
in my love; as I also have
kept my Father's commandments,
and do abide in his
love.</cell></row></table>

<p>
10. Here he points out how
they are to continue to enjoy
His love: it is by keeping His
commandments.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. Haec locutus sum vobis,
ut gaudium meum in vobis sit,
et gaudium vestrum impleatur.</cell>
<cell>11. These things I have
spoken to you, that my joy
may be in you, and your joy
may be filled.</cell></row></table>

<p>
11. The meaning is: these
things, namely, that you should
keep My commandments and
continue to retain My love,
I have spoken in order that
My joy on account of you
may continue (the true reading
is ᾖ, not μείνῃ, but does not
alter the sense), and your joy
may be perfected.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Hoc est præceptum meum
ut diligatis invicem, sicut dilexi
vos.</cell>
<cell>12. This is my commandment,
that you love one
another, as I have loved you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
12. He had just said that the
observance of His commandments
is a necessary condition
to be fulfilled by those who
would retain His love, and
now He goes on to point to one
commandment that in a special
manner is <emph>His</emph>, the <q>new commandment</q>
(<ref target='XIII_34'>xiii. 34</ref>), to which
they must attend.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>13. Maiorem hac dilectionem
nemo habet, ut animam suam
ponat quis pro amicis suis.</cell>
<cell>13. Greater love than this
no man hath, that a man lay
down his life for his friends.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. In this verse He explains
what sort is that love of His
upon which theirs must be
modelled (comp. 1 John iii. 16).
The meaning is, that no
greater proof of love for a
friend can be given than to lay
down one's life for him. This
He was about to do for them.
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
The comparison is not between
dying for a <emph>friend</emph> and dying
for an <emph>enemy</emph>, but between the
different proofs of love for a
friend.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Vos amici mei estis, si
feceritis quae ego praecipio
vobis.</cell>
<cell>14. You are my friends, if
you do the things that I command
you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
14. Here He shows that in
speaking of laying down His
life for His friends, He means
laying it down for the
Apostles.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>15. Iam non dicam vos servos,
quia servus nescit quid faciat
dominus eius. Vos autem
dixi amicos: quia omnia quaecumque
audivi a Patre meo,
nota feci vobis.</cell>
<cell>15. I will not now call you
servants: for the servant
knoweth not what his Lord
doth. But I have called you
friends: because all things
whatsoever I have heard of my
Father, I have made known
to you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
15. He has referred to them
as friends, and will do so in
future. Formerly, indeed, He
had referred to them as His
servants (John <ref target='XII_26'>xii. 26</ref>, <ref target='XIII_11'>xiii.
16</ref>), but now after He has
taken them so fully into His
confidence, told them of His
speedy departure from them
(<ref target='XIII_33'>xiii. 33</ref>), pointed out to them
His consubstantiality with the
Father (<ref target='XIV_7'>xiv. 7-11</ref>), and instructed
them that the Holy
Ghost was to come to them
(xiv. <ref target='XIV_16'>16</ref>, <ref target='XIV_17'>17</ref>), He will no longer
speak of them as servants, but
as friends.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>All things whatsoever I
have heard of my Father, I
have made known to you.</hi>
That is to say, all the knowledge
which was communicated
to Him, together with His
Divine nature, in His eternal
generation by the Father; all
this, as far as they were capable
(John <ref target='XVI_12'>xvi. 12</ref>), and it was
useful for them, He had communicated
to them.
</p>

<anchor id='XV_16'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Non vos me elegistis:
sed ego elegi vos et posui vos,
ut eatis, et fructum afferatis:
et fructus vester maneat: ut
quodcumque petieritis Patrem
in nomine meo, det vobis.</cell>
<cell>16. You have not chosen
me: but I have chosen you;
and have appointed you, that
you should go, and should
bring forth fruit, and your
fruit should remain: that
whatsoever you shall ask of
the Father in my name, he
may give it you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. <hi rend='bold'>You have not chosen
me: but I have chosen you.</hi>
Or more exactly; <q>it was not
you that chose Me, but I chose
you,</q> where the aorist refers
back to the definite act of
selecting and calling the
Apostles. Not only then was
His love for them most intense,
as was signified in verse 13, but
it was also <emph>gratuitous</emph>, unmerited:
and this is now pointed out.
You did not choose Me as your
friend, but I chose you as My
special friends, My Apostles;
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
and set you up as such, in order
that you should go into the
whole world (Mark xvi. 15).
and bear fruit in yourselves and
others, and that this fruit should
remain unto eternal life.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>That</hi> (ἵνα) <hi rend='bold'>whatsoever you
shall ask of the Father in my
name, he may give it you</hi>.
Some as Mald. and A Lap.
take ἵνα here to denote a consequence:
if you bring forth
the fruit for which I have
chosen you, <emph>it will come to pass</emph>
that whatsoever, &amp;c. Others
think ἵνα may retain its usual
telic force: I appointed you
in order that ... your fruit
should remain, and that whatsoever
<emph>in reference to that fruit</emph>
you shall ask, &amp;c. On what is
meant by asking the Father in
Christ's name, see above on
<ref target='XIV_13'>xiv. 13</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Haec mando vobis, ut
diligatis invicem.</cell>
<cell>17. These things I command
you, that you love one another.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17. Some take the meaning
to be: these things, namely, the
greatness and gratuitousness of
My love for you <emph>I insist upon</emph>,
to the end that you may love
one another. Others as Mald.
and Patriz. take the meaning
to be the same as in verse 11:
this is what I command you,
namely, that you love one another.
The use of ταῦτα (haec)
and not τοῦτο (hoc) is rather
against the latter view, but it is
replied that the plural demonstrative
followed by the single
precept is intended to signify
that charity is the fulfilment of
the whole law.
</p>

<anchor id='XV_18'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Si mundus vos odit,
scitote quia me priorem vobis
odio habuit.</cell>
<cell>18. If the world hate you,
know you that it hath hated
me before you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. Having exhorted them
to mutual love, He now fortifies
them against the hatred of the
world and the persecutions that
awaited them. The world, as
is plain, is the wicked world,
and in being hated by it they
shall only be treading in the
footsteps of their Master.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>It hath hated.</hi> The Greek
perfect implies not merely
a passing manifestation of
hatred, but an abiding and
persistent feeling.
</p>

<anchor id='XV_19'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Si de mundo fuissetis,
mundus quod suum erat diligeret:
quia vero de mundo
non estis, sed ego elegi vos de
mundo propterea odit vos mundus.</cell>
<cell>19. If you had been of the
world, the world would love
its own: but because you are
not of the world, but I have
chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hateth you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. <hi rend='bold'>If you had been</hi>, ought
rather to be: if you were. The
five-fold repetition of <q>the
world</q> in this verse brings
vividly before us this great
antagonist of Christ.
</p>

<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Mementote sermonis mei,
quem ego dixi vobis: Non est
servus maior domino suo. Si
me persecuti sunt, et vos persequentur:
si sermonem meum
servaverunt, et vestrum servabunt.</cell>
<cell>20. Remember my word
that I said to you: The
servant is not greater than
his master. If they have
persecuted me, they will also
persecute you: if they have
kept my word, they will keep
yours also.</cell></row></table>

<p>
20. He now reminds them of
what He had told them before
(<ref target='XIII_11'>xiii. 16</ref>) that: <q>a servant is
not greater than his master,</q>
and from this He goes on to
signify what they must expect
to meet with from the world.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>If they have kept my word.</hi>
Some think there is reference
to those who having been of the
world came out from it to follow
Christ and keep His word.
But it appears more probable
that He speaks of those who
are still of the world, and leaves
it to be supplied that since they
had not kept His word, so
neither would they keep that
of the Apostles. By the word
of the Apostles is meant the
word of Christ as preached by
them.
</p>

<anchor id='XV_21'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>21. Sed haec omnia facient
vobis propter nomen meum:
quia nesciunt eum qui misit me.</cell>
<cell>21. But all these things
they will do to you for my
name's sake: because they
know not him that sent me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
21. But remember that you
shall suffer in a glorious cause;
namely, on My account; for
they will persecute you because
you are My followers, and this
because through culpable ignorance
they will not recognise
God as My Father, nor Me as
the Son of God.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Si non venissem, et
locutus fuissem eis, peccatum
non haberent: nunc autem
excusationem non habent de
peccato suo.</cell>
<cell>22. If I had not come, and
spoken to them, they would
not have sin: but now they
have no excuse for their sin.</cell></row>
<row><cell>23. Qui me odit et Patrem
meum odit.</cell>
<cell>23. He that hateth me,
hateth my Father also.</cell></row></table>

<p>
22, 23. That this ignorance
is culpable, He now proves
from the fact that He had
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
Himself declared to them His
relations with the Father.
The sin (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>peccatum</foreign>) is that of
incredulity, and in remaining
incredulous and hating Christ,
they thereby showed that they
hated the Father who sent
Him.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Si opera non fecissem in
eis quae nemo alius fecit, peccatum
non haberent: nunc
autem et viderunt, et oderunt et
me, et Patrum meum.</cell>
<cell>24. If I had not done among
them the works that no other
man hath done, they would not
have sin: but now they have
both seen and hated both me
and my Father.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. Not only His words
(verse 22), but also His unparalleled
miracles deprived
them of all excuse for their
unbelief. See above on <ref target='III_2'>iii. 2</ref>.
But now they have seen, or
ought to have seen, the Father
in Me (see above on <ref target='XIV_9'>xiv. 9</ref>);
and they have seen Me, and
they have hated Us both.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Sed ut adimpleatur sermo
qui in lege eorum scriptus est:
Quia odio habuerunt me gratis.</cell>
<cell>25. But that the word may
be fulfilled which is written in
their law: <hi rend='italic'>They have hated me
without cause</hi>.</cell></row></table>

<p>
25. Yet, He continues, it is
only what their own Scriptures
(Ps. xxxiv. 19) foretold, that
they would hate Him without
cause. Thus this hatred
of the world, so far from
weakening the faith of the
Apostles in Christ as the
Messias, should confirm it,
since the Messias was to be
hated by the world. In this
verse ἵνα has its usual <emph>telic</emph>
force, and the sense is: but
this has come to pass <emph>in order
that</emph> the Scripture might be
fulfilled. See above on <ref target='XII_37'>xii.
37-40</ref>. The passage of the
Psalm referred to is probably
Messianic in its literal sense.
</p>

<anchor id='XV_26'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>26. Cum autem venerit Paraclitus,
quem ego mittam vobis
a Patre, spiritum veritatis, qui
a Patre procedit, ille testimonium
perhibebit de me:</cell>
<cell>26. But when the Paraclete
cometh, whom I will send
you from the Father, the
Spirit of truth, who proceedeth
from the Father, he shall give
testimony of me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>27. Et vos testimonium perhibebitis,
quia ab initio mecum
estis.</cell>
<cell>27. And you shall give testimony, because you are with
me from the beginning.</cell></row></table>

<p>
26, 27. The connection with
the preceding is: though the
world hate Christ, yet the Holy
Ghost and the Apostles shall
bear witness to Him. Here
again, in verse 26, we have
distinct mention of the Three
Persons of the Blessed Trinity.
See xiv. <ref target='XIV_16'>16</ref>, <ref target='XIV_25'>26</ref>.
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
Though the Holy Ghost is
not here said to proceed from
the Son as well as from the
Father (<q>ex Patre Filioque</q>),
yet this is implied in His being
sent by the Son (see above on
<ref target='XIV_25'>xiv. 26</ref>), and can be clearly
proved against the schismatical
Greeks from other parts of
Scripture, as from John xvi.
<ref target='XVI_13'>13</ref>, <ref target='XVI_14'>14</ref>. The Greek rendered
<hi rend='bold'>you shall give testimony</hi>,
is ambiguous, and may be
either an imperative or
an indicative. However, as
Christ seems to be speaking
of the witnesses who
will maintain His cause
against the world, and not to
be prescribing the duty of the
Apostles, the indicative is
preferable.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XVI.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-4. <hi rend='bold'>Christ points out the violence of the persecutions which await
the Apostles, and His object in forewarning them.</hi>
</p>

<p>
5-7. <hi rend='bold'>He again consoles them, and tries to reconcile them to His
departure, by telling them that it is necessary, in order that
the Holy Ghost may come to them.</hi>
</p>

<p>
8-15. <hi rend='bold'>He points out that the Holy Ghost will convince the world
vv. (8-11), instruct them in what they were not yet able to
learn (vv. 12-13), and give glory to Christ Himself (vv. 14-15).
Hence they ought to desire the Holy Ghost's coming.</hi>
</p>

<p>
16-22. <hi rend='bold'>He promises that after a brief absence, during which they shall
have bitter sorrow, He will return to them, and their sorrow
shall give place to joy.</hi>
</p>

<p>
23, 24. <hi rend='bold'>He bids them to pray to the Father in His name, and promises
that such prayer will be heard.</hi>
</p>

<p>
25-28. <hi rend='bold'>Though He has spoken obscurely to them in this last discourse,
the time is at hand when He will speak plainly&mdash;a time when
they will ask the Father in His name.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Haec locutus sum vobis,
ut non scandalizemini.</cell>
<cell>1. These things have I spoken
to you, that you may not be
scandalized.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. His object in foretelling
<hi rend='bold'>these things</hi> was that the
Apostles might not be scandalized;
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, might not waver in
the faith amid the trials that
were before them. But what are
<q>these things</q> to which He
refers? Some, as St. Aug.,
understand the reference to be
to the promise of the Comforter
(<ref target='XV_26'>xv. 26, 27</ref>). Others, as
Mald., to the persecutions that
awaited the Apostles, because
the prediction of those persecutions
now would prepare the
Apostles for them; nay, when
those persecutions should
come, they would be another
proof of the omniscience, and,
therefore, of the Divinity of
Christ. Others, as A Lap.,
combine both the preceding
opinions. This appears to us
the correct view, for Christ has
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
spoken towards the end of the
preceding chapter, both of the
persecutions that the Apostles
were to endure, and of the
Comforter, who was to come to
them; and the prediction of
both facts was calculated to
sustain them when trials should
come. On the one hand, they
would not become disspirited
by <emph>unexpected</emph> reverses; on the
other, they would trust in the
Comforter, who had been promised.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. Absque synagogis facient
vos: sed venit hora, ut omnis
qui interficit vos, arbitretur
obsequium se praestare Deo:</cell>
<cell>2. They will put you out
of the synagogues: yea, the
hour cometh, that whosoever
killeth you, will think that he
doth a service to God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. <hi rend='bold'>They will put you out of
the synagogues</hi> (or rather,
synagogue) <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> excommunicate
you. Compare <ref target='IX_22'>ix. 22</ref>;
<ref target='XII_42'>xii. 42</ref>. Yea, He continues,
the time is approaching when
persecution will be so violent
that your countrymen
will think that they do a service
to God by putting you
to death. The mention of
the synagogue proves that the
reference is to <emph>Jewish</emph> persecutions.
No doubt many of the
Jews thought, like St. Paul
(Acts xxvi. 9; 1 Tim. i. 13),
that they were pleasing God by
persecuting Christians. Their
ignorance, however, while it extenuated,
did not wholly excuse,
their sin, for it was culpable.
They ought to have known
from Christ's words and works,
and from the fulfilment of
prophecy in Him, that He was
the Messias, to whom, therefore,
they were bound to
hearken (Deut. xviii. 19), and
whose religion was to perfect
and supplant their own.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Et haec facient vobis, quia
non noverunt Patrem neque me.</cell>
<cell>3. And these things will
they do to you, because they
have not known the Father,
nor me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. See above on <ref target='XV_21'>xv. 21</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Sed haec locutus sum
vobis: ut, cum venerit hora
eorum, reminiscamini quia ego
dixi vobis.</cell>
<cell>4. But these things I have
told you, that when the hour
shall come, you may remember
that I told you of them.</cell></row></table>

<p>
4. <q>Eorum</q> of the Vulgate
is to be connected with <q>reminiscamini,</q>
on which it depends.
The comma ought to
be before <q>eorum;</q> the Greek
text makes this clear. As we
said above on verse 1, the fact
that Christ had foretold these
persecutions, would be another
proof of His Divinity. Moreover,
since He knew that these
persecutions were in store, and
did not avert them, the Apostles
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
ought to learn from this to bear
them with resignation, inasmuch
as they were not merely
endured for Him, but permitted
by Him.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. Haec autem vobis ab initio
non dixi, quia vobiscum eram.
Et nunc vado ad eum, qui
misit me: et nemo ex vobis
interrogat me, Quo vadis?</cell>
<cell>5. But I told you not these
things from the beginning,
because I was with you. And
now I go to him that sent me,
and none of you asketh me:
Whither goest thou?</cell></row></table>

<p>
5. <hi rend='bold'>But I told you not these
things from the beginning.</hi>
<q>These things,</q> we again
understand, as in verse 1, both
of the persecutions which were
before them, and of the coming
of the Holy Ghost to take
Christ's place, and console the
Apostles.
</p>

<p>
But had He not already
predicted that the Apostles
were to be persecuted? Had
He not said: <q>But beware
of men. For they will deliver
you up in councils, and they
will scourge you in their
synagogues. And you shall
be brought before governors
and before kings for My sake,
for a testimony to them and to
the Gentiles</q>? (Matt. x. 17,
18). To this we may reply,
with Mald., that He had never
predicted persecution until
now, and that St. Matthew,
in recording, in the passage
cited, the prediction of persecution,
does not follow the
order of time, but inserts, in
connection with the mission of
the Apostles to the Jews what
was spoken long after, probably
immediately before,
Christ's ascension, when they
were receiving their mission to
the whole world. (Matt. xxviii.
19, 20). Or we may reply&mdash;and
this answer we prefer&mdash;that
although He had before predicted
the persecution of the
Apostles, yet He had not till
now told them what He told
them on this occasion; namely,
that they should be excommunicated
by the Jews, and that
men would think they were
actually honouring God in
persecuting them. So that
although He had before predicted
persecution, still it was
only now He predicted its
terrible violence.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And</hi> (Gr. δε = <hi rend='italic'>but</hi>) <hi rend='bold'>now I go
to him that sent me</hi>. These
words are to be connected
closely with the preceding.
Before, He had not told them
these things, <emph>but</emph> now He is
about to leave them, and there
is, therefore, a special reason
for His referring to the future.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And none of you asketh
me: Whither goest thou?</hi>
Or: <q>And does none of you
ask Me: Whither goest
thou</q>? Our Lord probably
remained silent for a few moments
after announcing His
departure, in order to see if
anyone would question Him
further about it. Since no one
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
did, He mildly reminds them in
the words before us, that they
are not sufficiently solicitous to
learn the things that concerned
Him; but, as He goes on to say
in verse 6, are too much occupied
with their own sorrows.
No doubt, Peter had already
asked Him: <q>Lord, whither
goest Thou?</q> (John <ref target='XIII_36'>xiii. 36</ref>);
and Thomas had said: <q>Lord,
we know not whither Thou
goest; and how can we know
the way?</q> (John <ref target='XIV_5'>xiv. 5</ref>), but
they had not persevered in
asking; and at present, when
He is just about to depart,
they put Him no questions
about the glory that was
before Him, or the nature of
the kingdom that awaited
Him.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Sed quia haec locutus sum
vobis: tristitia implevit cor
vestrum.</cell>
<cell>6. But because I have
spoken these things to you
sorrow hath filled your heart.</cell></row></table>

<p>
6. <hi rend='bold'>These things</hi> we again
take, as in verses 1 and 5, to
refer to the persecutions which
He had predicted, and to the
coming of the Holy Ghost
<emph>after His departure</emph>. That
there is not question merely of
persecutions predicted, is
proved by the next verse, in
which He goes on, in immediate
connection with this (<emph>But</emph> I
tell you the truth, it is expedient
to you that I go) to
reconcile them to His departure.
For the same reason,
there is not question merely of
the coming of the Holy Ghost,
since that was no cause for
sorrow, but of His coming <emph>in
Christ's place</emph>. The prediction
of persecution, and of the
coming of the Holy Ghost as
<emph>implying the departure of
Christ</emph>, was what filled their
hearts with sorrow.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Sed ego veritatem dico
vobis: expedit vobis ut ego
vadam: si enim non abiero,
Paraclitus non veniet ad vos:
si autem abiero, mittam eum
ad vos.</cell>
<cell>7. But I tell you the truth:
it is expedient to you that I
go: for if I go not, the
Paraclete will not come to
you: but if I go, I will send
him to you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. <hi rend='bold'>But.</hi> The meaning is:
notwithstanding your silence
(verse 5), or: notwithstanding
your sorrow (verse 6), <hi rend='bold'>I tell
you the truth: it is expedient
to you that I go</hi>.
This expediency arose from
the free disposition of the
Divine economy that the Son
of God should remove from
among men His visible
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
presence before the Holy Ghost
should come. Nothing in the
nature of things necessarily
required this; but God freely
decreed it so.
</p>

<anchor id='XVI_8'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>8. Et cum venerit ille, arguet
mundum de peccato, et de
iustitia, et de iudicio.</cell>
<cell>8. And when he is come
he will convince the world of
sin, and of justice, and of
judgment.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. De peccato quidem, quia
non crediderunt in me:</cell>
<cell>9. Of sin: because they
believed not in me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10. De iustitia vero, quia
ad Patrem vado, et iam non
videbitis me:</cell>
<cell>10. And of justice: because
I go to the Father; and you
shall see me no longer.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11. De iudicio autem, quia
princeps huius mundi iam iudicatus
est.</cell>
<cell>11. And of judgment: because
the prince of this world
is already judged.</cell></row></table>

<p>
8-11. We may take these
four verses together, as the
three last explain the first.
Christ goes on to show why it
is expedient for the Apostles
that He should leave them,
and that the Holy Ghost
should come. <hi rend='bold'>And when he
is come, he will convince</hi>,
&amp;c. The Greek word for <q>will
convince</q> is ἐλένξει, which
may mean either&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) to rebuke,
or (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) to prove a thing clearly
so that it must be admitted.
It is not absolutely necessary
that the word be used in the
same sense throughout these
verses; but since there is
nothing to indicate that it is
used in different senses, we
take it in the same sense
throughout. This sense we
believe to be the second
just indicated, for this alone
suits verses 10 and 11.
</p>

<p>
The meaning of the whole
passage, then, we take to be the
following:&mdash;And when the Holy
Ghost is come, He will clearly
prove to the <emph>unbelieving</emph> world,
principally through your preaching
and miracles, its own sin,
My justice, and its own condemnation.
Its own sin of incredulity,
which is proved by
the fact that the children of this
wicked world did not believe in
Me (verse 9); My justice,
which is proved by the fact that
I go to God to reign with Him
for ever, so that men shall see
Me no more; its own condemnation,
which is shown to be
certain by the fact that its
prince, the devil, is already
condemned. Christ's victory
over the devil at His death
implied the condemnation of
the devil's kingdom, the world.
And as Christ's death was so
near, the devil might be said
to be already condemned.
</p>

<p>
If it be objected to our interpretation
that, since there is
question in verses 9 and 11 of
the <emph>world's</emph> sin and condemnation,
so there must be question
of the world's justice in verse
10, we reply that Christ makes
it sufficiently clear that He is
speaking in verse 10 of His own
justice by the words He adds:
<q>Because I go to the Father,
and you shall see Me no
longer.</q>
</p>

<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>

<p>
If it be objected that the Holy
Ghost did not prove to the
world its own sin, nor Christ's
justice, nor its own condemnation,
we reply that He did,
though the world in many of its
children closed its eyes to the
proof; <hi rend='italic'>Oculos habent et non
videbunt</hi>. (Ps. cxiii. 5.) The
world saw in the sanctity of the
Christian religion, in the miracles
wrought by Christ's
followers, in the power of the
Apostles and their successors
over devils and those possessed
by devils, what ought to have
convinced it of Christ's Divinity,
and of its own sin and inevitable
condemnation.
</p>

<anchor id='XVI_12'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Adhuc multa habeo vobis
dicere: sed non potestis portare
modo.</cell>
<cell>12. I have yet many things
to say to you: but you cannot
hear them now.</cell></row></table>

<p>
12. <hi rend='bold'>I have yet many
things.</hi> Among these many
things which they were not yet
able to bear were, probably, the
nature of His earthly kingdom,
and the abrogation of the Jewish
Law, in as far as it was
judicial and ceremonial. As
Jews who had grown up imbued
with deepest reverence
for the Mosaic Law, the
Apostles were naturally slow
to believe that it was to be
abrogated; and immediately
before St. Peter received Cornelius
into the Church as the
first-fruits of the Gentile world,
he had to be taught by a vision
from heaven that the Jewish
distinction between clean and
unclean meats was no longer to
exist. (Acts x. 10-16.) And
as to the nature of Christ's
earthly kingdom, the Apostles
in common with the rest of
their race still hoped that the
Messias would establish a
mighty Jewish empire, and
restore Israel to a foremost
place among the nations. Even
on Ascension day they still
cherished this hope, as we learn
from the Acts: <q>Lord, wilt
Thou at this time restore again
the kingdom to Israel?</q> (Acts
i. 6).
</p>

<anchor id='XVI_13'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>13. Cum autem venerit ille
Spiritus veritatis, docebit vos
omnem veritatem: non enim
loquetur a semetipso: sed quaecumque
audiet loquetur, et
quae ventura sunt annuntiabit
vobis.</cell>
<cell>13. But when he, the Spirit
of truth, is come, he will teach
you all truth. For he shall
not speak of himself: but
what things soever he shall
hear, he shall speak: and the
things that are to come he
shall shew you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. <hi rend='bold'>But when he, the Spirit
of truth, is come.</hi> Though you
are now unable to bear these
truths, you shall be taught
them all by the Holy Ghost.
The Greek for <hi rend='bold'>will teach</hi> (docebit)
is ὀδηγήσει, which means to
lead on the way, to conduct;
and the sense, therefore, is:
He shall <emph>guide</emph> you into <emph>all the
truth</emph> (which I have still to tell
you, but which you are now
unable to bear). We are not to
suppose that the Apostles were
taught all the truth on the day
of Pentecost; the revelation
was vouchsafed gradually, and
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
at their death the deposit of
faith was complete.<note place='foot'><q>Non utique ipso die Pentecostes, sed <emph>tempore</emph> adventus Spiritus Sancti
paulatim, ac per gradus inducti sunt in omnem veritatem, ut ex manifestis
factis et ex ipsis verbis constat: <emph>inducet</emph> in omnem veritatem ὀδηγήσει ὑμᾶς.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Franz.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>De Trad.</hi>, p. 267. note 1.</note> Since the
Apostles' time, doctrines and
dogmas have, indeed, been
more fully drawn out and developed,
but no new doctrines
have been revealed. This follows
clearly from the words we
are considering; for it was to
the Apostles, to those same men
who were now unable to bear
it, that the Holy Ghost was to
teach the <emph>whole</emph> truth.
</p>

<p>
The promise here made to the
Apostles, that they should be
taught the whole truth by the
Holy Ghost, while it regarded
them <emph>directly</emph>, regarded the
whole Church indirectly; for
it is to them as Apostles,
appointed to teach the whole
Church, that Christ speaks:
<q>I have chosen you, and have
appointed you, that you should
go, and should bring forth
fruit, and your fruit should
remain</q> (John <ref target='XV_16'>xv. 16</ref>). And
in the solemn prayer to the
Father, with which this discourse
concludes, He prays
the Father: <q>Sanctify them
(the Apostles) in (the) truth....
And not for them only
do I pray, but for them also
who, through their word,
shall believe in me.</q> So that
the Apostles first, and through
them the Church of Christ,
received the whole truth from
the Holy Ghost.<note place='foot'>See Franz., <hi rend='italic'>De Div. Trad. Thes.</hi>, xxii. 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>For he shall not speak of
himself.</hi> These words give
a reason why the Holy
Ghost shall teach the truth.
No other reason than His own
Divinity and essential truthfulness
was necessary; but, as
the Apostles did not yet understand
that this new Comforter
was Divine, Jesus vouchsafes
another reason to convince
them of His truthfulness.
This other reason is, that the
Holy Ghost shall speak to
them, not what has been
excogitated or invented by
Himself, but what he received
from the Son of God in His
eternal procession. Doubtless
the Apostles did not yet know
much about the mystery of the
Divine procession; still they
could gather from these words
that the new Comforter was
to announce to them the truth,
as Christ's legate, and this was
enough.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>But what things soever
he shall hear, he shall
speak.</hi> A Divine Person
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
(unless He were possessed of
two natures, like Jesus Christ)
cannot be conceived to acquire
anything except in His procession;
for once He is a Divine
Person He is infinite, and
can receive nothing that He
does not already possess.
Hence whatever the Holy
Ghost <emph>heard</emph>, He heard from
all eternity, in proceeding
from the Father and the Son.<note place='foot'><q>Semper itaque audit Spiritus Sanctus quia semper scit: ergo et scivit,
et scit, et sciet; ac per hoc et audivit, et audit, et audiet: quia sicut jam
diximus, hoc est illi audire quod scire, et scire illi hoc est quod esse. Ab illo
igitur audivit, audit, et audiet a quo est: ab illo est a quo procedit.</q>&mdash;St. Aug.
on this verse, <hi rend='italic'>Tract.</hi> 99.</note>
Yet, though the Holy Ghost
heard and hears from all
eternity, the <emph>future</emph> tense
<q>shall hear</q> is used because
there is question of knowledge
<emph>to be manifested in the future</emph>.<note place='foot'><q>Uno verbo: Spiritus Sanctus aeternaliter audit et accipit a Filio cum
respectu ad effectum in tempore, qui tum quando Christus loquebatur, promittebatur
adhuc futurus; ideo auditio et acceptio quae aeternaliter et ideo etiam
tunc est, quando existit effectus, potuit propter hanc operationem et propter
effectum futurum ad extra enuntiari in forma temporis futuri.</q>&mdash;Franz., <hi rend='italic'>De
Trin. Thes.</hi>, xxxii. i. 4 c.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And the things that are
to come he shall shew you.</hi>
Hence the Holy Ghost was to
confer the gift of prophecy
on the Apostles. As evidence
that He conferred this gift
upon them, see Acts xx. 29;
St. Jude 17, 18, and The
Apocalypse.
</p>

<anchor id='XVI_14'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Ille me clarificabit: quia
de meo accipiet, et annuntiabit
vobis.</cell>
<cell>14. He shall glorify me;
because he shall receive of
mine, and shall shew <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> to
you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
14. <hi rend='bold'>He shall glorify me.
because he shall receive
of mine</hi> (ἐκ τοῦ ἐμοῦ), <hi rend='bold'>and
shall shew it to you</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The Holy Ghost gave glory to
Christ before men by showing
that Christ was the Messias
and Saviour of the world.
This He did principally through
the Apostles, by imparting to
them (in so far it was necessary
or useful for them) the
knowledge which He had
received from the Son, and
especially, as the context here
(verse 16) proves, the knowledge
of future things. In the
words, <q>He shall receive of
mine,</q> we refer <q>mine</q> to
the Son's knowledge, which,
however, <emph>in reality</emph> does not
differ in a Divine Person from
His essence.<note place='foot'><q>Igitur in <emph>significatione formali</emph> illud <emph>meum</emph>, quod Spiritus veritatis
dicitur accipere communicatum a Filio, est absoluta sapientia cum respectu ad
extra, ad doctrinam scilicet inspirandam et annuntiandam. At profecto
sapientia absoluta <emph>identice ac realiter</emph> est ipsamet essentia divina.</q>&mdash;Franz.,
<hi rend='italic'>Thes.</hi>, xxxii. i. 4 b.</note>
</p>

<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>

<p>
As we remarked already on
verse 13, a Divine Person
(having no other nature than
the Divine), cannot be conceived
to receive anything
except in His procession; and
hence when the Holy Ghost is
here said to receive from the
Son, we have a convincing
proof that <emph>He proceeds from the
Son</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The schismatical Greeks
attempted in two ways to get
rid of the argument that is
thus afforded for the procession
of the Holy Ghost from the Son.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) First, they supplied πατρός
after τοῦ ἐμοῦ, and thus represented
Christ as saying that
the Holy Ghost should receive
from the Father. Hence they
concluded that He proceeds
only from the Father. But we
say in reply&mdash;(1) that it is
against the rules of Greek
syntax that the possessive
pronoun τοῦ ἐμοῦ should refer
to a word not expressed in
the phrase. (2) That all the
fathers, Greek as well as Latin,
referred τοῦ ἐμοῦ to <emph>what
is in the Son</emph> and not to the
Father. (3) The context here
Proves that τοῦ ἐμοῦ does not
refer to the Father. For in
verse 15 we have the pronoun
repeated in the plural: <q>All
things whatsoever the Father
hath <emph>are mine</emph> (ἐμά ἐστιν).
Therefore I said, he shall receive
of <emph>mine</emph>,</q> and it is plain
that in both instances <emph>mine</emph>
refers to the same thing; hence
not to the Father, but to what
is in the Son, communicated
from the Father.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Equally inadmissible is
the other interpretation by
which it was attempted to explain
away this text. According
to this second view, Christ's
words would mean: The Holy
Ghost shall glorify Me because
He shall receive of Mine <emph>from My
Father</emph>, and shall show it to
you. But there is nothing to
justify this insertion of the
words <q>from My Father;</q>
on the contrary, the whole context
points to the fact that the
Holy Ghost is to receive what
is the Son's (of mine) <emph>from the
Son Himself</emph>. For since the Holy
Ghost in reality glorified the
Father and Himself as well
as the Son, when we find it
here stated that He shall glorify
the Son, <emph>because</emph> He shall receive
of Him, the natural inference
is, that He receives
from Him directly, and not
merely through the Father.
Besides, when the text distinctly
states that the Holy Ghost shall
receive of the Son, it is wholly
arbitrary and really not an interpretation
of the words at all
to say that He receives of the
Son <emph>through the Father</emph>, and not
directly of the Son Himself.
</p>

<p>
Hence the words of this verse
plainly mean that the Holy
Ghost receives from the Son,
and consequently, as we saw
above on verse 13, afford a proof
that He proceeds from the
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
Son, just as those of xv. 26
prove that He proceeds from
the Father. He proceeds,
therefore, as our faith professes,
Ex Patre <hi rend='italic'>Filioque</hi>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>15. Omnia quaecumque habet
Pater, mea sunt. Propterea
dixi: quia de meo accipiet, et
annuntiabit vobis.</cell>
<cell>15. All things whatsoever
the Father hath, are mine. Therefore I said, he shall receive
of mine, and show <hi rend='italic'>it</hi> to
you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
15. <hi rend='bold'>Therefore I said, he
shall receive</hi>, &amp;c. The present
(λαμβάνει) is the more probable
reading, but it is used
for the future, so that the Vulgate
gives the meaning. This
verse is variously connected
with the preceding, even by
Catholic commentators. We
believe that Christ is here proving
what He has just said,
namely, that the Holy Ghost
should receive of Him. The proof
is this: All whatsoever the
Father hath (except, of course,
the relation of Paternity) is the
Son's; but the Father has
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>spiratio activa</foreign>: in other words,
the Holy Ghost proceeds from
Him, therefore He proceeds
from the Son also: <q>All things
whatsoever the Father hath are
mine; <emph>therefore</emph> I said, He shall
receive of mine, and shew it
to you.</q> Note that this verse,
too, furnishes a clear proof of the
procession of the Holy Ghost
from the Son, since the Son has
all that the Father hath.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Modicum, et iam non
videbitis me: et iterum modicum,
et videbitis me: quia vado
ad Patrem?</cell>
<cell>16. A little while, and now
you shall not see me: and
again a little while, and you
shall see me: because I go to
the Father.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. Instead of ού the best supported
Greek text reads οὐκέτι
(no longer), and omits the words
<q>because I go to the Father.</q>
We are not, however, convinced
that the Vulgate is
wrong in retaining the words,
for the next verse, where they
are certainly genuine, makes it
clear that our Lord must have
used the words here; though,
of course, it is possible that
St. John did not record them.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>A little while.</hi> There are
two probable interpretations
of the two <q>little whiles.</q> According
to one, the first <q>little
while</q> is the short time until
Christ's death, and <emph>after</emph> that they
should not see Him; then another
<q>little while,</q> namely the
three days that His body was
in the grave, and <emph>after</emph> that
they should see Him risen to a
glorious and immortal life.
According to the other, the first
<q>little while</q> is the time until
the ascension, and <emph>after</emph> that
they should see Him no longer
among them on earth; the
second <q>little while</q> is the
time from the ascension until
the day of general judgment,
and <emph>after</emph> that they should see
Him for ever, their joy no man
should take from them (verse
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
22), and they would require to
ask Him no questions (verse
23), because all would be clear
in the light of the beatific vision.
</p>

<p>
We prefer the latter view;
for when Christ goes on in the
following verses to explain, His
words, especially in verses 22
and 23, are not easily or naturally
understood in the first
interpretation. For, though the
Apostles did rejoice after His
resurrection (John xx. 20), and
though that glorious event with
all that it implied must have
been to them a source of lasting
joy, still they had very many
occasions for sorrowing subsequently.
Besides, we know
that after His resurrection they
put Him questions (Acts i. 6).
Hence, we prefer to hold that
the second <q>little while</q> (with
the Lord a thousand years are
as one day, 2 Peter iii. 8) shall
terminate with the day of
judgment, for then only shall
they require to put Him no
questions, and both body and
soul shall be for ever happy.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Because I go to the Father.</hi>
Some connect with both the
preceding members. Others,
as Mald., only with the first
member&mdash;you shall not see Me,
because I go to the Father.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Dixerunt ergo ex discipulis
eius ad invicem: Quid est
hoc quod dicit nobis: Modicum,
et non videbitis me: et iterum
modicum: et videbitis me, et
quia vado ad Patrem?</cell>
<cell>17. Then some of his disciples
said one to another: What is
this that he saith to us: A
little while, and you shall not
see me: and again a little
while, and you shall see me, and
because I go to the Father?</cell></row>
<row><cell>18. Dicebant ergo: Quid est
hoc quod dicit Modicum: nescimus
quid loquitur.</cell>
<cell>18. They said therefore:
What is this that he saith, A
little while? we know not
what he speaketh.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17, 18. The Apostles were
perplexed, and did not understand.
Doubtless their sorrow
at the thought of His departure
confused them, and in any case
the meaning was not clear.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Cognovit autem Iesus
quia volebant cum interrogare
et dixit eis: De hoc quaeritis
inter vos quia dixi, Modicum?
et non videbitis me: et iterum
modicum, et videbitis me.</cell>
<cell>19. And Jesus knew that
they had a mind to ask him:
and he said to them: Of this
do you inquire among yourselves,
because I said: A
little while, and you shall not
see me: and again a little
while, and you shall see me?</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. Though they had spoken
only among themselves, Jesus
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
knew their thoughts, and was
aware of their perplexity.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Amen, amen dico vobis:
quia plorabitis et flebitis vos,
mundus autem gaudebit: vos
autem contristabimini, sed
tristitia vestra vertetur in
gaudium.</cell>
<cell>20. Amen, amen, I say to
you, that you shall lament and
weep, but the world shall
rejoice: and you shall be made
sorrowful, but your sorrow
shall be turned into joy.</cell></row>
<row><cell>21. Mulier cum parit, tristitiam
habet, quia venithora eius:
cum autem pepererit puerum,
iam non meminit pressurae
propter gaudium, quia natus
est homo in mundum.</cell>
<cell>21. A woman, when she is
in labour, hath sorrow, because
her hour is come: but when
she hath brought forth the
child, she remembereth no
more the anguish, for joy that
a man is born into the world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
20, 21. He compares their
brief sorrow here below to
that of a woman in labour,
and their lasting joy to that of
a mother when she has brought
forth her child.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Et vosigitur nunc quidem
tristitiam habetis, iterum autem
videbo vos, et gaudebit cor vestrum:
et gaudium vestrum
nemo toilet a vobis?</cell>
<cell>22. So also you now indeed
have sorrow, but I will see you
again, and your heart shall
rejoice; and your joy no man
shall take from you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
22. Applying the preceding
comparison, He says: You
too now in this life, the period
of your travail, have sorrow;
but I will see you again at the
day of general judgment (or,
perhaps, when their souls
should enter heaven), and then
your joy shall be lasting.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Et in illo die me non
rogabitis quidquam. Amen,
amen dico vobis: si quid
petieritis Patrem in nomine
nemo dabit vobis.</cell>
<cell>23. And in that day you
shall not ask me anything.
Amen, amen, I say to you: if
you ask the Father anything
in my name, he will give it
you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
23. In that time, when you
shall enjoy the vision of God,
you shall not require to put
me any questions<note place='foot'>There is a clear and important difference between the two words for asking
used in this verse. ᾽Ερωτάω always in classical, and generally in Hellenistic
Greek, means to interrogate, to question. In Hellenistic Greek it sometimes
means to request, to petition, as in verse 26 below; but even then there is a
distinction which is carefully observed throughout the New Testament
between it and αἰτέω. ᾽Ερωτάω is used of the request of an equal, or at
least of a familiar friend, αἰτέω of the supplication of an inferior. Hence
Christ never once uses the latter word in reference to His own asking of the
Father.</note> (οὐκ ἐρωτήσετε)
as just now you wished to
do (verse 19), because you
shall know all that you can
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
desire to know. Thus in the
interpretation that we have
adopted, Christ, after promising
the Apostles the knowledge of
future things while they are
here on earth (verses 13-15),
goes on in the following verses
(16-23) to promise them His
own. society, eternal joy, and
perfect knowledge in the life
to come.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Amen, amen, I say to
you: if you ask</hi> (αἰτήσητε) <hi rend='bold'>the
Father anything</hi>, &amp;c. These
words ought to begin a new
verse, for a new subject, the
efficacy of prayer, is begun.
The correct Greek reading is
ἄν τι (not ὅτι ὅσα ἄν), and
agrees with the Vulgate, <q>si
quid.</q> Most critics of the
Greek text read the latter part
of this verse thus: <q>If you
ask the Father anything, He
will give it you in my name.</q>
Still we are inclined to believe
that the Vulgate reading,
which connects <q>in my name</q>
with <q>ask</q> and not with
<q>will give,</q> is correct; for
immediately after (in verses 24
and 26) we have question of
asking in the name of Christ.
Moreover, the connection
between verses 23 and 24, with
the apparent antithesis: <q>if
you ask the Father anything
in my name, He will give it
you. Hitherto you have not
asked anything in my name,</q>
confirms the Vulgate reading.
We prefer the Vulgate reading
therefore, and the sense is, that
if they ask the Father anything
in the name, through the
merits, of Christ, He will give
it; provided, of course, as
St. John says in his First Epistle
(v. 14) they ask according to
the will of God. Hence the
Church always asks through
the merits of Christ: <q>Per
Christum Dominum nostrum,</q>
or <q>Per Dominum nostrum
Jesum Christum,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
There could be no clearer
proof than this verse affords of
the wondrous efficacy of prayer.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Usque modo non petistis
quidquam in nomine meo:
petite, et accipietis, ut gaudium
vestrum sit plenum.</cell>
<cell>24. Hitherto you have not
asked anything in my name.
Ask, and you shall receive:
that your joy may be full.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. They had already indeed
asked of Christ Himself; they
had also asked the Father;
but not in the name of Christ,
as they are now bid to do.
This was a new form of
prayer. The Jews, when
praying, begged of God to
remember their Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob;
Christians appeal through the
name and merits of Jesus Christ.
</p>

<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>

<anchor id='XVI_25'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Haec in proverbiis locutus
sum vobis. Venit hora, cum
iam non in proverbiis loquar
vobis, sed palam de Patre annuntiabo
vobis.</cell>
<cell>25. These things I have
spoken to you in proverbs.
The hour cometh when I will
no more speak to you in
proverbs, but will show you
plainly of the Father.</cell></row></table>

<p>
25. <hi rend='bold'>In proverbs.</hi> The
word translated <q>proverbs</q>
is παροιμίαις, which signifies
not merely proverbial, but also
obscure or figurative language;
and this is the sense here, as
is proved by the antithesis
between speaking <q>in proverbs</q>
and speaking <q>plainly.</q>
<q>These things,</q> then, concerning
His death, His
resurrection, His return to the
Father, the <q>little whiles,</q> &amp;c.,
He had spoken obscurely.
We must hold that the words
of institution of the Blessed
Eucharist are not included
in <q>these things.</q> They did
not belong to this discourse
<emph>after</emph> the Last Supper, but were
spoken during the supper.
Moreover, had they been obscure,
surely three Evangelists
and St. Paul would not have
narrated them without some
explanation.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>The hour cometh when I
will no more speak to you
in proverbs.</hi> <q>Hour</q> is the
ordinary Hebraism for time.
Some refer this to the next
life, some to the forty days
of Christ's risen life, and some
to the time after Pentecost.
With St. Aug. and Mald. we prefer
this latter view, for the first
opinion seems excluded by the
next verse, where it is said they
will ask of the Father during
the time in question, and we
know they shall not require to
ask in heaven. The second
opinion too (unless it be joined
with the third) is improbable,
for it was not till the day of
Pentecost, when they were
<q>endued with power from on
high</q> (Luke xxvi. 49), that they
were able to bear plain speaking,
or that Christ <emph>through the
Holy Ghost</emph> spoke plainly to
them.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>26. In illo die in nomine meo
petetis: et non dico vobis quia
ego rogabo Patrem de vobis:</cell>
<cell>26. In that day you shall
ask in my name: and I say
not to you, that I will ask
the Father for you:</cell></row></table>

<p>
26. <hi rend='bold'>I say not to you, that I
will ask the Father for you.</hi>
The sense is: I need not say,
I do not need to tell you, that
I will ask the Father for you.
This form of expression is what
is called <q>praeteritio,</q> not
<q>exclusio,</q> for we know that
Christ is <q>always living to
intercede for us</q> (Heb. vii.
25). The connection in the following
verse: <q>For the Father
Himself,</q> &amp;c., shows that
Christ also wished to intimate
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
that such intercession on His
part would not be necessary,
because the Father Himself
would be prompt to hear and
answer their prayers. Thus
they should understand that,
though Christ, their advocate,
was leaving them, yet they had
no reason to be disheartened,
since the Father unsolicited
would love them and hear their
prayers, because they had loved
Christ, and believed Him to be
the Messias sent by God.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>27. Ipse enim Pater amat
vos, quia vos me amastis, et
credidistis quia ego a Deo
exivi.</cell>
<cell>27. For the Father himself
loveth you, because you have
loved me, and have believed
that I came out from God.</cell></row>
<row><cell>28. Exivi a Patre, et veni
in mundum: iterum relinquo
mundum, et vado ad Patrem.</cell>
<cell>28. I came forth from the
Father, and am come into the
world: again I leave the
world, and I go to the Father.</cell></row></table>

<p>
28. Taking up the closing
words of the preceding verse,
He insists upon the truth of
what they have believed. For
in coming into the world I did
come out from God, who is My
Father, and now I return to
Him in leaving the world,
Some commentators refer the
words: <q>I came forth from the
Father</q> to the eternal procession,
and the following words to
the mission in time; but we think
the view we follow more probable;
for what is here asserted
is what the Apostles had already
believed, and we doubt
if they yet understood or
believed in the eternal procession.
</p>

<anchor id='XVI_29'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>29. Dicunt ei discipuli eius:
Ecce nunc palam loqueris, et
proverbium nullum dicis:</cell>
<cell>29. His disciples say to him:
Behold now thou speakest
plainly, and speakest no
proverb.</cell></row></table>

<p>
29. In saying that He was
about to leave the world and
go to the Father, He spoke
plainly, and explained their
doubts of verse 17.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>30. Nunc scimus quia scis
omnia, et non opus est tibi ut
quis te interroget: in hoc credimus
quia a Deo existi.</cell>
<cell>30. Now we know that thou
knowest all things, and thou
needest not that any man
should ask thee. By this we
believe that thou comest forth
from God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
30. Seeing that He had read
their thoughts (verse 19), and
anticipated their inquiries, even
for this reason they declare
their faith in Him as the
Messias and Son of God to be
<emph>confirmed</emph> and made perfect.
</p>

<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>31. Respondit eis Iesus:
Modo creditis?</cell>
<cell>31. Jesus answered them:
Do you now believe?</cell></row></table>

<p>
31. Christ's reply does not
deny that they believe; yet insinuates,
if we take it interrogatively
with the Vulgate,
that He had reason to doubt
the firmness of the faith they
boasted, as indeed He goes on
to declare plainly in the following
verses.
</p>

<anchor id='XVI_32'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>32. Ecce venit hora, et iam
venit, ut dispergamini unusquisque
in propria, et me solum
relinquatis: et non sum solus,
quia Pater mecum est.</cell>
<cell>32. Behold the hour cometh,
and it is now come, that you
shall be scattered every man
to his own, and shall leave me
alone: and yet I am not alone
because the Father is with me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
32. <hi rend='bold'>Hour</hi> is again a Hebraism
for time. This same prediction,
or a similar one, is recorded by
St. Matt. (xxvi. 31), and St.
Mark (xiv. 27), and according
to both it was made after
Christ and the Apostles had
left the supper room to go
towards the Mount of Olives.
As we observed above on <ref target='XIV_31'>xiv.
31</ref>, we think it highly improbable
that this long discourse
after the Last Supper was
spoken in the crowded streets of
Jerusalem; and if the words of
SS. Matthew or Mark obliged
us to hold that the prediction,
recorded by those Evangelists
was spoken whilst Christ and
the Apostles passed along the
streets, we would hold that
this prediction, recorded by
St. John, is a different one, and
that Christ referred twice on this
night to the desertion of His
Apostles. In reality, however,
SS. Matthew and Mark can be
satisfactorily explained on the
supposition that the prediction
which they record was spoken
outside the house where Christ
and the Apostles had supped,
or at some quiet spot on the
way to Mount Olivet.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>33. Haec locutus sum vobis,
ut in me pacem habeatis. In
mundo pressuram habebitis:
sed confidite, ego vici mundum.</cell>
<cell>33. These things I have
spoken to you, that in me you
may have peace. In the world
you shall have distress: but
have confidence, I have overcome
the world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
33. These last discourses
He had spoken to confirm their
faith and afford them consolation,
that so they might have
peace of heart, despite the
hatred of the world. Then He
closes this beautiful discourse
with the consoling and encouraging
assurance that He
was just about to conquer the
world (by prolepsis He speaks
of His victory as already
gained). The context shows
that this assurance implied
that they too, through Him,
should triumph over the world.
For it is because His victory
implied theirs that He tells them
to have confidence. <q>For
whatsoever is born of God overcometh
the world: and this is
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
the victory which overcometh
the world, our faith</q> (1 John
v. 4).
</p>

<p>
Thus in His last words to
His Apostles before His passion,
at the very moment when He
knew that His enemies were
approaching (xv. 30), Christ
confidently claims the glory of
a conqueror.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XVII.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-5. <hi rend='bold'>As man, Christ prays to the Father for Himself.</hi>
</p>

<p>
6-19. <hi rend='bold'>He prays for the Apostles.</hi>
</p>

<p>
20-23. <hi rend='bold'>He prays for all the faithful.</hi>
</p>

<p>
24-26. <hi rend='bold'>His last prayer for the Apostles.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Haec locutus est Iesus:
et sublevatis oculis in coelum,
dixit: Pater venit hora, clarifica
Filium tuum ut Filius tuus
clarificet te:</cell>
<cell>1. These things Jesus spoke,
and lifting up his eyes to
heaven, he said: Father, the
hour is come, glorify thy Son,
that thy Son may glorify thee.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. <hi rend='bold'>These things</hi>, we understand
here of all that is comprised
in the discourses just
recorded (xiii. 31-xvi. 33).
Having completed His words
of warning and consolation
and love, Jesus now turns
from teaching to prayer, from
earth to heaven, from His
children to His Father.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Glorify thy Son, that thy
Son may glorify thee.</hi>
Christ, <emph>as man</emph>, prays to His
Father; and the sense is:
The time of My trial is come;
do not desert Me, but glorify
Me by exalting My humanity
to a participation in the glory
of the Divinity; that so, by My
resurrection and ascension, I
may give glory to Thee, by
giving eternal life to all whom
Thou hast given me<note place='foot'><q>Resuscita me, ut innotescas toti orbi per me.</q>&mdash;St. Aug.</note> (verse 2).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Sicut dedisti ei potestatem
omnis carnis, ut omne
quod dedisti ei, det eis vitam
aeternam.</cell>
<cell>2. As thou hast given him
power over all flesh, that he
may give eternal life to all
whom thou hast given him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. These words explain <emph>how</emph>
Christ will glorify the Father,
namely, by giving eternal life
to all whom the Father had
given Him.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>All flesh</hi> is a Hebraism for
all mankind (John <ref target='I_14'>i. 14</ref>); and
by another Hebraism the
nominative <q>omne</q> of the
Vulgate is redundant, the
sense being as in our English
version.
</p>

<p>
This verse we connect with
the last clause of verse 1, and
take the sense to be: That
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
Thy Son may glorify Thee,
<emph>according as</emph> Thou hast given
Him power over all men, <emph>in
order that</emph> in them He may
glorify Thee. In other words,
Christ prays that the Father
may bring about His own
glory, which He had in view
in giving Christ power over
all men. There are various
other interpretations, but the
above seems to us best, as it
connects naturally with the
preceding, and retains the
ordinary signification of καθώς
and ἵνα.
</p>

<p>
This power over all men,
Christ, as God, possessed
from eternity, and as God-man
He obtained at His incarnation.
</p>

<p>
Though He has power over
all men, yet He does not give
eternal life to all men, but
only to those <emph>whom God has
given Him</emph> (<ref target='VI_36'>vi. 37</ref>), because
only these correspond with
His grace. This is implied in
Christ's language here, for the
words, <q>to all whom Thou
has given Him,</q> explain the
expression all flesh, and show
that it is only in those who
believe that the universal
Power over <q>all flesh</q> is
efficacious.
</p>

<anchor id='XVII_3'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Haec est autem vita
aeterna: ut cognoscant te, solum
Deum verum, et quem
misisti Iesum Christum.</cell>
<cell>3. Now this is eternal life:
that they may know thee, the
only true God, and Jesus
Christ, whom thou hast sent.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. <hi rend='bold'>Now this is eternal life</hi>,
&amp;c. The sense is: this is the
pledge, the cause of eternal
life (see John <ref target='III_36'>iii. 36</ref>), that they
know Thee <emph>with the knowledge
of faith</emph>, know Thee to be
the only true God and Jesus
Christ whom Thou hast sent.
The Greek ἵνα γινώσκωσίν σε
τὸν μόνον ἀληθινὸν θεόν shows
that the Father is here said to
be the only God, to the exclusion
of other Gods, but not to
the exclusion of other Persons
who participate in the same
Godhead. It is not meant that
the Father is the only Divine
Person. There are other Persons
in the Godhead, but
there is no other Godhead.
The words mean, then, that
they may know Thee to be
the only true God, to the exclusion
of all other Gods; but
do not mean that they may
know Thee alone to be the
true God, to the exclusion of
the Son and Holy Ghost.
</p>

<p>
Many of the fathers adopt
another interpretation of the
verse, holding that the order
of the words is inverted, and
that Divinity is predicated of
both the Father and Christ.
They understand the verse
thus: that they may know
Thee and Jesus Christ whom
Thou hast sent, to be the only
true God. So SS. Aug., Amb.,
Hil., Greg. Naz., Athan., Cyp.
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
The latter interpretation
more clearly establishes
Christ's Divinity against the
Arians; but in any interpretation
it is clear that Christ
implies His own Divinity,
since He declares that the
knowledge of Himself, equally
with that of the Father, is the
cause and pledge of eternal
life. He who had said: <q>I
and the Father are one</q> (John
x. 30), and who, a few verses
farther down in this prayer,
says to the Father: <q>All my
things are thine, and thine are
mine,</q> cannot reasonably be
supposed to withdraw His
claims to Divinity in the
words before us.
</p>

<p>
Some of the fathers, and
many of the scholastics, hold
that there is question in verse 3
not of the knowledge of God
through <emph>faith</emph>, but of the knowledge
of the blessed in heaven;
and they argue from this verse
to prove that the essence of
life eternal consists in <emph>knowing</emph>
God; in other words, that the
happiness of the blessed consists
in an act of the <emph>intellect</emph>;
namely, the vision of God.<note place='foot'>All theologians admit that the happiness of the blessed consists <emph>radically</emph>
in the vision of God; but while many Thomists hold that it consists <emph>essentially</emph>
in this, other theologians hold that it consists in acts of the will, as of love and
joy, as well as of the intellect.</note>
Since we believe that the question
here is of the knowledge
of God through faith, and not
through the beatific vision, we
hold that no argument can be
drawn from this verse as to the
essence of the happiness of the
blessed.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Ego te clarificavi super
terram: opus consummavi,
quod dedisti mihi ut faciam:</cell>
<cell>4. I have glorified thee on
the earth: I have finished the
work which thou gavest me to
do:</cell></row></table>

<p>
4. Some understand these
words as proleptic, and take
the sense to be: I am about to
glorify Thee by My death, to
finish the work of <emph>redemption</emph>
which thou gavest Me to do.
Others understand of the work
of preaching, which was now
actually completed, and by
which the Father's name and
glory had been manifested <emph>upon
the earth</emph>. The latter interpretation
seems to us the more
natural, and more suited to the
context, especially to verse 6:
<q>I have manifested thy name
to the men whom thou hast
given me out of the world.</q>
</p>

<anchor id='XVII_5'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. Et nunc clarifica me tu,
Pater, apud temetipsum, claritate, quam habui, prius quam
mundus esset, apud te.</cell>
<cell>5. And now glorify thou me,
O Father, with thyself, with
the glory which I had, before
the world was, with thee.</cell></row></table>

<p>
5. In return for His having
given glory to the Father
<emph>upon the earth</emph>, Christ, as
man, prays the Father to
glorify Him in heaven. There
is a difficulty here, arising
from the fact that Christ
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
seems to pray that the glory
which as God He possessed
from all eternity may be given
to Him <emph>as man</emph>. Now, the glory
of God is incommunicable, and
even the blessed humanity of
Christ is incapable of partaking
fully thereof. Hence various
interpretations have been advanced
in order to explain this
difficulty:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(1) Some say that Christ, as
man, prays merely for that glory
which, <emph>in the decrees of God,
was given</emph> to His humanity
from all eternity. But against
this view is the fact that the
fathers generally quoted the
latter part of this verse to prove
the eternal existence and Divinity
of Christ.
</p>

<p>
(2) Hence others, and we
believe rightly, hold that in the
latter part of the verse there is
question of the Divine and
eternal glory of Christ, and
understand Him to pray that
His humanity, according to its
capacity, may be made to partake
of the glory of the Divinity.
Of course, the humanity
was incapable of receiving the
infinite glory of the Divinity;
but the glorious qualities of
Christ's glorified body are a
participation, according to the
capacity of the body, of the
eternal glory of the Son.
<q>Da ut claritas et gloria quam
ego ut Deus ab aeterno tecum
habeo, communicetur et extendatur
usque ad carnem meam,
quae propter dispensationem
hactenus est suspensa</q><note place='foot'>Christ's human soul enjoyed the beatific vision from the first moment
of the incarnation; but the connatural effects of this upon His body were
suspended during His mortal life.</note> (Tolet.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Manifestavi nomen tuum
hominibus, quos dedisti mihi de
mundo. Tui erant, et mihi eos
dedisti: et sermonem tuum
servaverunt.</cell>
<cell>6. I have manifested thy
name to the men whom thou
hast given me out of the
world. Thine they were, and
to me thou gavest them: and
they have kept thy word.</cell></row></table>

<p>
6. This passage from verse
6-19 refers primarily to the
Apostles, as appears from
verses 12 and 18; and Christ
prayed specially for them because
He was sending them
into the world, the heralds of
His Gospel (verse 18), the
foundations upon which His
earthly kingdom was to be
reared (Eph. ii. 20). The sense
is: I have manifested Thy name,
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
Thy glory <emph>effectually</emph> (He had
manifested it to others, who
refused to believe) to those
whom Thou hast given Me to
be My Apostles; they were
Thine by election, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
In this verse, as well as in
verses 7 and 8, the correct reading
is ἔδωκας (gavest), not δέδωκάς
(hast given).<note place='foot'><q><emph>Aoristus</emph> ... indicat peractam rem esse aut nunc aut olim, hoc est,
aliqua praeteriti temporis parte, quae <emph>indefinita</emph> relinquitur. <emph>Perfectum</emph> sicut
in classica graecitate, ita et in graecitate N. Testamenti adhiberi solet ad
significandam actionem plane praeteritam, quae aut nunc finita est, aut per
effectus suos durat.</q>&mdash;Beel., <hi rend='italic'>G. G.</hi>, § 41.</note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Nunc cognoverunt quia
omnia, quae dedisti mihi: abs
te sunt:</cell>
<cell>7. Now they have known
that all things which thou hast
given me are from thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Quia verba quae dedisti
mihi, dedi eis: et ipsi acceperunt,
et cognoverunt vere quia
a te exivi, et crediderunt quia
tu me misisti.</cell>
<cell>8. Because the words which
thou gavest me, I have given
to them: and they have received
them, and have known
in very deed that I came out
from thee, and they have
believed that thou didst send
me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Ego pro eis rogo: non
pro mundo rogo, sed pro his
quos dedisti mihi, quia tui
sunt:</cell>
<cell>9. I pray for them: I pray
not for the world, but for them
whom thou hast given me:
because they are thine:</cell></row></table>

<p>
9. <hi rend='bold'>I pray for them.</hi> The
pronouns are emphatic. For
these men who on so many
grounds are deserving of Thy
grace and care, do I, to whom
Thou gavest them, ask. But
what does the Saviour of the
world mean by saying that He
does not pray for the world,
He who on the cross prayed
for the very men that crucified
Him: <q>Father, forgive them,
for they know not what they
do</q>? (Luke xxiii. 34). Some
reply that Christ speaks not
of sufficient, but of efficacious
prayer; but the true view is
that He is speaking only of
this particular prayer, in which
He asks for the Apostles what
the world was unfit and unwilling
to receive (see verses
13, 17, 18).
</p>

<p>
The fact, then, that He prays
in this prayer, not for the
Father's enemies, but for those
who belong to both the Father
and Himself is put forward as
a reason why He ought to be
heard by the Father.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Because they are thine.</hi>
These words sum up this first
reason, and we take them as
depending upon the phrase: <q>I
pray for them</q> at the commencement
of the verse.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>10. Et mea omnia tua sunt:
et tua mea sunt: et clarificatus
sum in eis.</cell>
<cell>10. And all my things are
thine, and thine are mine: and
I am glorified in them.</cell></row></table>

<p>
10. <hi rend='bold'>And all my things are
thine, and thine are mine.</hi>
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
Could anyone but God address
God so? These words seem
to be thrown in to give a
reason for the statement:
<q>they are thine,</q> the reason
being that since they were
Christ's (the Father had made
them Christ's), they must be
the Father's also, for <q>all my
things are thine, and thine are
mine.</q>
</p>

<p>
The remaining words of
this verse afford a second
reason why the Father
ought to hear Christ's prayer
for the Apostles and watch over
them, because Christ, through
them, had been glorified
before men, as a teacher is
honoured by disciples attaching
themselves to him. Or the
words: <q>I am glorified,</q> may
possibly be proleptic, and mean
that Christ was to be glorified
<emph>afterwards</emph> through the preaching
of the Apostles.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. Etiam non sum in mundo,
et hi in mundo sunt, et ego
ad te venio. Pater sancte,
serva eos in nomine tuo, quos
dedisti mihi: ut sint unum,
sicut et nos.</cell>
<cell>11. And now I am not in
the world, and these are in the
world, and I come to thee.
Holy Father, keep them in thy
name, whom thou hast given
me: that they may be one, as
we also are.</cell></row></table>

<p>
11. A third reason why
they ought now to receive the
Father's special care was
because Christ was now
leaving them, and they were
to remain in the world.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Keep them in thy name,
whom thou hast given me.</hi>
The sense of this reading is
sufficiently evident. The best-supported
Greek reading, however,
is ὧ<note place='foot'>So Griesb., Lachm., Tisch., Treg., Westc., Hort, and the Revised Version.</note> (not οὕς), ὧ
being attracted into the dative
case of the preceding noun,
and standing for ὁ. The
most probable meaning of this
Greek reading is: keep them
in the confession of Thy name,
in the knowledge of Thee,
which Thou hast given to Me,
and which I in turn have given
to them; that they may be one
by a union of faith and charity
resembling, though in an
imperfect way, the union
between the Persons of the
Blessed Trinity.
</p>

<anchor id='XVII_12'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Cum essem cum eis, ego
servabam eos in nomine tuo.
Quos dedisti mihi, custodivi:
et nemo ex eis periit, nisi filius
perditionis, ut scriptura impleatur.</cell>
<cell>12. While I was with them,
I kept them in thy name.
Those whom thou gavest me
have I kept: and none of
them is lost, but the son of
perdition, that the scripture
may be fulfilled.</cell></row></table>

<p>
12. <hi rend='bold'>I kept them.</hi> In the
original, the imperfect tense
ἐτήρουν brings out more
clearly Christ's continuous
care.
</p>

<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>

<p>
In this verse, too, there is a
difference of opinion as to
whether οὐς or ὦ is the
correct reading, but the
Vulgate reading is more
strongly supported here than
in verse 11.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And none of them is lost,
but the son of perdition.</hi>
<q>Son of perdition</q> is a
Hebraism, signifying one
devoted to destruction, as
Judas was, through his own
fault.
</p>

<p>
None of them was lost in
either soul or body except
Judas, who was already lost
as to his soul, though not
irreparably; and who was
soon to be irreparably lost
both as to soul and body.
But this loss of Judas was not
to be ascribed to Christ, but
took place <emph>in order that</emph> (see
above on <ref target='XII_37'>xii. 37-40</ref>) the
Scripture (Ps. xl. 10) might
be fulfilled. The Holy Ghost
had predicted the ruin of Judas,
because it was foreseen that
this would certainly come
about through the wretched
Apostle's own fault. In the
words: <q>none of them is lost,</q>
we think there is question of
both the bodies and souls of
the Apostles; for while it is
generally admitted that Christ
here claims to have guarded
the <emph>souls</emph> of the Apostles from
spiritual ruin, John xviii. <ref target='XVIII_8'>8</ref>, <ref target='XVIII_9'>9</ref>,
seems to prove, as we shall
there show, that in the words
before us Christ speaks of
having guarded from harm
their bodies also.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>13. Nunc autem ad te venio:
et haec loquor in mundo, ut
habeant gaudium meum impletum
in semetipsis.</cell>
<cell>13. And now I come to thee:
and these things I speak in the
world, that they may have my
joy filled in themselves.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. <hi rend='bold'>These things</hi> we refer
to what Christ had already
spoken in the hearing of the
Apostles in this prayer to the
Father; namely, that He
should give them life eternal
(verse 2); that He should be
glorified with the Father
(verse 5); and that in His
absence the Father would
watch over them, and keep
them in His name (verse 11).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>That they may have my
joy filled</hi> (made full) <hi rend='bold'>in
themselves</hi>. <q>My joy</q>
might mean the joy they had
received from Christ, or the
joy they felt <emph>because</emph> of Christ;
but we think the most probable
and most natural meaning is:
that they may have the joy
which <emph>I feel</emph> in going to the
Father, made full in themselves.
Before this time He
had said to them: <q>If you
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
loved Me, you would indeed
<emph>be glad</emph>, because I go to the
Father</q> (<ref target='XIV_28'>xiv. 28</ref>); and now
He has spoken in this prayer
of the glory which awaited
Him, and of the care of the
Father for the Apostles, in
order that they may be reconciled
to, and fully rejoice
in, His departure to the Father.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Ego dedi eis sermonem
tuum, et mundus eos odio habuit,
quia non sunt de mundo,
sicut et ego non sum de mundo.</cell>
<cell>14. I have given them thy
word, and the world hath
hated them, because they are
not of the world; as I am not
of the world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
14. <hi rend='bold'>I have given them
thy word, and the world
hath hated them.</hi> <q>I</q> (ἐγώ)
is emphatic; I, Thy Son. This
is a <emph>fourth</emph> reason why the
Father ought to watch over
and guard the Apostles&mdash;the
world hated them, and this
because they had received the
words of Christ, which are the
words of the Father.
</p>

<p>
Though <emph>in</emph> the world, the
Apostles were not <emph>of</emph> the world,
not imbued with its spirit, nor
pandering to its tastes.
</p>

<anchor id='XVII_15'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>15. Non rogo ut tollas eos
de mundo, sed ut serves eos a
malo.</cell>
<cell>15. I pray not that thou
shouldst take them out of the
world, but that thou shouldst
keep them from evil.</cell></row></table>

<p>
15. <hi rend='bold'>From evil</hi> (ἐκ τοῦ πονηροῦ).
This may refer to the evil
of the wicked world which is sin,
or to the devil, the <emph>evil one</emph>. The
parallel passage in 1 John v.
18, 19 favours the latter view.
These words, to which the
Apostles were listening, gave
them to know that they must
not despair, and wish to quit
the world when trials should
come; but rather, remaining in
the world, keep themselves unspotted
from its defilements.
</p>

<anchor id='XVII_16'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. De mundo non sunt,
sicut et ego non sum de mundo.</cell>
<cell>16. They are not of the
world: as I also am not of the
world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. The last clause of verse
14 is repeated as the ground of
another petition, namely, that
the Father may <q>sanctify</q>
them.
</p>

<p>
In order to emphasize the
point in their hearing, and also
as a motive why God ought to
hear the petition that follows,
the fact that the Apostles are
not men of the world is repeated
and insisted upon by
Christ.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Sanctifica eos in veritate.
Sermo tuus veritas est.</cell>
<cell>17. Sanctify them in truth.
Thy word is truth.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17. <hi rend='bold'>In the truth</hi>, is the correct
reading; not <q>in <emph>thy</emph>
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
truth,</q> nor <q>in truth.</q> The
word in which they are to be
sanctified is probably the word
of God, which Christ had
preached, and which is referred
to in the end of the verse: <q>Thy
word is truth;</q> and not, as
Mald. holds, the real sanctification
of the New Law as opposed
to the typical and merely external
sanctification by which
the priests of the Old Law were
set apart for their functions.
</p>

<p>
In the Gospel, then, and for
the preaching of the Gospel
Christ prays that the Apostles
may be sanctified. But what
does the word <q>sanctify</q> here
mean? Sometimes the word
ἁγιάζειν signifies to make holy,
or to make more holy, or to
keep more holy (1 Cor. vii. 11;
1 Thess. v. 23); at other times,
it means to set apart or destine
for an office; and in this sense
it is generally used throughout
the Old Testament. Both
senses are probably combined
in the word here, for it was by
making and keeping them holy
that the Apostles were to be
efficaciously set apart by the
Father for the sacred mission
to which Christ had already
called them.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Sicut tu me misisti in
mundum, et ego misi eos in
mundum.</cell>
<cell>18. As thou hast sent me
into the world, I also have
sent them into the world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. This verse shows that
the sanctification is prayed for
especially with a view to their
mission as Apostles. <hi rend='bold'>Have
sent</hi> (Greek <q>did send</q>) is
used proleptically, for the
Apostles had not yet received
their mission to the <emph>Gentile</emph>
world. See John <ref target='XX_21'>xx. 21</ref>;
Matthew xxviii. 18, 19; Mark
xvi. 15.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Et pro eis ego sanctifico
meipsum: ut sint et ipsi sanctificati
in veritate.</cell>
<cell>19. And for them do I
sanctify myself: that they also
may be sanctified in truth.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. <hi rend='bold'>And for them do I
sanctify myself.</hi> St. Aug.
understands of the sanctification
wherewith the Son of God
sanctified the humanity He
assumed. <q>Quando Verbum
caro factum est, tunc sanctificavit
se in se, id est hominem
se in Verbo se, quia unus Christus
Verbum et homo: propter
sua vero membra dicit: et pro
eis ego sanctifico meipsum,
hoc est, ipsos in me, quoniam
in me etiam ipsi sunt et ego.
Ut sint et ipsi sanctificati in
veritate. Quid est <q>et ipsi</q>
nisi quemadmodum ego.</q> (St.
Aug. <hi rend='italic'>in loc.</hi>).
</p>

<p>
But the common opinion is
that Christ speaks of the sacrifice
of Himself which He was
about to offer a few hours afterwards.
In this view the meaning
is: and for them do I set Myself
apart, do I consecrate Myself
as a victim, that they may
be truly and efficaciously set
apart and consecrated for the
preaching of the Gospel. Thus
while the word <q>sanctify</q> has
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
in both clauses the same generic
meaning of setting apart,
there is yet a difference. Christ
sets Himself apart, devotes
Himself to death, that they may
be consecrated in the fulness
of grace for the work of the
Apostleship. Christ sets Himself
apart, but the Apostles are
evidently to be set apart by the
Father; that is to say, effectually
fitted by the Father for
the work to which Christ had
already called them.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>In truth.</hi> (ἐν ἀληθείᾳ). The
absence of the Greek article
distinguishes this clause from
that in verse 17. There the
question is of <q><emph>the</emph> truth,</q> the
word of God; here <q>in truth,</q>
seems to be equivalent to
truly, really&mdash;that they also
may be truly sanctified. Compare
2 John 1; 3 John 1.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Non pro eis autem rogo
tantum, sed et pro eis qui
credituri sunt per verbum eorum
in me:</cell>
<cell>20. And not for them only
do I pray, but for them also
who through their word shall
believe in me:</cell></row></table>

<p>
20. Instead of <hi rend='bold'>shall believe</hi>
the more probable Greek reading
has the present tense, as if
Christ looked upon the Church
of the future as actually present.
He now prays not alone for the
Apostles, but for all who should
believe through their preaching.
There is direct reference
to the Apostles and their converts,
but the prayer of Christ
included the successors of both.
</p>

<anchor id='XVII_21'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>21. Ut omnes unum sint,
sicut tu Pater in me, et ego in
te, ut et ipsi in nobis unum
sint: ut credat mundus quia
tu me misisti.</cell>
<cell>21. That they all may be
one, as thou, Father, in me,
and I in thee: that they also
may be one in us: that the
world may believe that thou
hast sent me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
21. The unity of the faithful
cannot, of course, equal the
unity of nature in the Persons
of the Blessed Trinity; but
since it is here compared with
the latter, we are justified
in concluding that it is as perfect
as possible; and hence a
unity of intellect through faith,
of will through charity, and of
government through the due
subordination of the different
members. Such a moral miracle
as this unity implies, must
suppose a <emph>principle</emph> of unity in
the Church; that is to say, a
teaching and ruling authority
by which this marvellous unity
is Divinely secured.
</p>

<p>
The words <hi rend='bold'>That the world
may believe that thou hast
sent me</hi> show that this unity
was to be a <emph>note</emph> of the true
Church, pointing it out even
to the wicked world as the
Church of God.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Et ego claritatem quam
dedisti mihi, dedi eis: ut sint
unum, sicut et nos unum sumus.</cell>
<cell>22. And the glory which
thou hast given me, I have
given to them: that they may
be one, as we also are one.</cell></row></table>

<p>
22. <hi rend='bold'>And the glory which
thou hast given me, I have
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
given to them.</hi> Some understand
<q>the glory</q> here mentioned
to be the gift of working
miracles; others, the glory
<emph>about to be enjoyed</emph> by Christ's
humanity, which is to be shared
in by all the faithful after the
day of judgment; others, the
glorious privilege of Divine
filiation which makes the faithful
the adopted sons, as Christ
was the natural Son, of God;
others, in fine, the glory of the
Divinity which Christ had just
shared with the Apostles that
night, and which He was to
share with all the faithful in
future, in giving them His own
glorious and Divine Person in
the Blessed Eucharist.
</p>

<p>
We believe that either the
third or fourth is the correct
opinion. But it is not easy to
choose between these two. The
third is the more obvious, and
is certainly very probable; but
in favour of the fourth it must
be said it was very natural
that Christ speaking of the
union of the faithful on this
night when He had instituted
the Blessed Eucharist, should
refer to that wonderful cause
and pledge of union which He
had just left to the faithful in
the Blessed Sacrament: <q>For
we, being many, are one bread,
one body, all that partake<note place='foot'>Or more correctly: <q>for we all partake of one bread.</q></note> of
one bread</q> (1 Cor. x. 17).
See also John <ref target='VI_56'>vi. 57</ref>.
</p>

<anchor id='XVII_23'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Ego in eis, et tu in me:
ut sint consummati in unum:
et cognoscat mundus, quia tu
me misisti, et dilexisti eos,
sicut et me dilexisti.</cell>
<cell>23. I in them, and thou in
me: that they may be made
perfect in one; and the world
may know that thou hast sent
me, and hast loved them as
thou hast also loved me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
23. <hi rend='bold'>I in them, and thou in
me.</hi> This clause is in apposition
to the last clause of the
preceding verse: <q>that they
may be one, as we also are
one,</q> and explains how the
union there spoken of is
effected, namely, by the
presence of Christ in the
faithful.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Pater, quos dedisti mihi,
volo ut ubi sum ego, et illi sint
mecum: ut videant claritatem
meam, quam dedisti mihi, quia
dilexisti me ante constitutionem
mundi.</cell>
<cell>24. Father, I will that where
I am, they also whom thou
hast given me may be with
me: that they may see my
glory which thou hast given
me, because thou hast loved
me before the creation of the
world.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. Here, too, as in verses
11, 12, some of the critics
read the neuter pronoun ὃ
(that which) instead of ὁὺς
(they whom). The Vulgate
reading is at least equally
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
probable. Having prayed in
verses 20-21 for all the
faithful, Christ now continues
His prayer for the
Apostles, as a comparison of
this verse with verses 11 and 12
proves. And this, His last
petition for them, is, that they
may one day be made partakers
of that glory which He as
God enjoyed eternally, and
into which as man He was to
enter at His ascension.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>That they may see my
glory</hi>; that is to say, see and
enjoy the glory of My Divinity
(reflected also in My humanity;
see above on verse 5). We
believe there is not question
merely of the glory of Christ's
humanity, for He seems to
pray here that the Apostles
may enjoy the bliss of heaven,
which does not consist in the
vision of Christ's humanity,
but in the vision and enjoyment
of the Divinity. If this
is the correct view, and we
think, with A Lap., that it is,
then this glory was given
from all eternity to the Son.
The words: <hi rend='bold'>Because thou
hast loved me</hi>, do not, in this
view, state the <emph>cause</emph> of the
communication of the eternal
glory of the Father to the Son.
See above on chapter v., verse
<ref target='V_20'>20</ref>.
</p>

<p>
If the words be understood,
as St. Aug. understood them,
of Christ's humanity, then the
meaning is: Share with My
Apostles the glory which Thou
art <emph>about to bestow</emph> upon Me
because from all eternity Thou
hast loved Me, and predestined
Me <emph>as man</emph> for this
glory. In this view the love
of the Father for Christ as
man is the reason why He
glorifies Christ's humanity.
</p>

<p>
The phrase <hi rend='bold'>before the
creation of the world</hi>,
or more accurately, <q>before
the foundation of the world,</q>
denotes that the world is
not eternal; while Christ's
claim to have been loved by
the Father before creation, is
a claim to personal existence
before the world began, and
indirectly, therefore, a claim to
an eternal Personality.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Pater iuste, mundus te
non cognovit: ego autem te
cognovi, et hi cognoverunt quia
te me misisti.</cell>
<cell>25. Just Father, the world
hath not known thee: but I
have known thee: and these
have known, that thou hast
sent me.</cell></row>
<row><cell>26. Et notum feci eis nomen
tuum, et notum faciam: ut dilectio,
qua dilexisti me, in
ipsis sit, et ego in ipsis.</cell>
<cell>26. And I have made known
thy name to them, and will
make it known; that the love
wherewith thou hast loved me,
may be in them, and I in them.</cell></row></table>

<p>
25, 26. These verses give a
reason why the Father who is
<emph>just</emph>, and who rewards man's
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
merits, even though these
merits are themselves the
result of His grace, ought to
hear Christ's prayer. The
reason is, because He who
prays had known and loved
the Father, and they for whom
He prays had known and
received Himself as the Messias.
Moreover, He had made known
the Father to them, and would
do so still more, afterwards,
through the Holy Ghost.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>That the love wherewith
thou hast loved me, may be
in them, and I in them.</hi> Here
He states His object in making
known the Father's name. It
was in order that the special love
of the Father might extend
to them, and that He Himself
might remain intimately united
to them by His grace, and by
the presence of the Divinity
in their souls.
</p>

<p>
With these beautiful and
consoling words, which bespoke
the special love of the
Father for the Apostles, and
His own enduring presence
with them notwithstanding
His departure, Christ concludes
this sublime prayer to His
eternal Father.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XVIII.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-7. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus retires to the Garden of Gethsemani, where, having been
betrayed by Judas, He freely delivers Himself up, after He had
first shown His almighty power, by casting His enemies to
the ground.</hi>
</p>

<p>
8-11. <hi rend='bold'>He requests that the Apostles be allowed to depart unmolested,
and forbids Peter to defend Him with the sword.</hi>
</p>

<p>
12-14. <hi rend='bold'>He is seized, bound, and led before Annas.</hi>
</p>

<p>
15-27. <hi rend='bold'>He is led before Caiphas, followed by Peter and John, and while
being examined there, is thrice denied by Peter.</hi>
</p>

<p>
28-38. <hi rend='bold'>He is led before Pilate, the Roman Governor, and examined
by him.</hi>
</p>

<p>
39-40. <hi rend='bold'>Pilate attempts to release Jesus, but the crowd calls for the
release of Barabbas.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<anchor id='XVIII_1'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Haec cum dixisset Iesus,
egressus est cum discipulis suis
trans torrentem Cedron, ubi
erat hortus in quem introivit
ipse, et discipuli eius.</cell>
<cell>1. When Jesus had said
these things, he went forth
with his disciples over the
brook Cedron, where there
was a garden, into which he
entered with his disciples.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. Having finished His last
discourses to the Apostles, and
His prayer to the Father, Jesus
accompanied by the Apostles
now proceeds towards Mount
Olivet (Matt xxvi. 36; Mark
xiv. 32), crossing the brook of
Cedron on His way. As we
stated already, we believe that
the discourse (xv. 1-xvi. 33)
and the prayer after the Last
Supper were not spoken while
Christ and the Apostles passed
along, but at some point of
rest either outside the Supper-room
or along the way. See
above on <ref target='XIV_31'>xiv. 31</ref>. Nor are we
to suppose from the words of
this verse, <q>He went forth,</q>
that it was only now Christ and
the Apostles left the Supper-room.
As we remarked already,
had Christ and the
Apostles not left the Supper-room
when He gave the word
to do so (<ref target='XIV_31'>xiv. 31</ref>), St. John
would very probably have noted
the fact, and added some word
of explanation. In the verse
before us, then, there is not
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
question of going forth from
the Supper-room but of going
forth from the city. Comp.
Matthew xxvi. 30, 36; Mark
xiv. 26, 32.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Over the brook Cedron.</hi>
Many authorities read <q>over
the brook of the cedars</q> (τῶν
κέδρων). <hi rend='bold'>Where there was a
garden.</hi> SS. Matthew and
Mark say that He came to <q>an
enclosed piece of ground</q>
(χωρίον), called Gethsemani.
<q>Gethsemani&mdash;גת, (gath) = a
wine-press, and שׂמן (shemen)
= oil&mdash;was the spot where the
prediction of Isaias was fulfilled:
<q>I have trodden the wine
press alone</q> (Isaias lxviii. 3). A
modern garden, enclosed by a
wall, in which are some old
olive-trees, said to date from
the time of Christ, is now
pointed out as the Garden of
Gethsemani. It is on the left
bank of the Kedron, about
seven hundred and thirty feet
from the east wall of the city,
and immediately south of the
road, from St. Stephen's Gate
to the summit of Olivet ....
This garden is, there is little
reason to doubt, the spot alluded
to by Eusebius, when he
says (<hi rend='italic'>O. S.</hi>, 2, pp. 248, 18) that
<q>Gethsemane was at the foot
of the Mount of Olives, and
was then a place of prayer for
the faithful</q></q> (Smith's <hi rend='italic'>B. D.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>sub voc</hi>).
</p>

<p>
The Cedron is a small <emph>winter-flowing</emph>
(χειμάῤῥον) stream,
which passes through the
ravine below the eastern wall
of Jerusalem, and separates
the Mount of Olives from the
Temple mount. For mention
of it in the Old Testament see
3 Kings ii. 37; xv. 13; 4 Kings
xxi. ii. 4; Jer. xxxi. 40.
</p>

<p>
St. John passes over the
history of the prayer in the
garden, of the appearance of
the angel to strengthen Christ,
and of the sweat of blood, because
all this had been already
recorded by the Synoptic
Evangelists. (Matt. xxvi. 38-44;
Mark xiv. 34-40; Luke
xxii. 40-44.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. Sciebat autem et Iudas qui
tradebat eum, locum: quia frequenter
Iesus convenerant illuc
cum discipulis suis.</cell>
<cell>2. And Judas also, who
betrayed him, knew the place:
because Jesus had often
resorted thither together with
his disciples.</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. <hi rend='bold'>Who betrayed him.</hi> In
the original the present participle
marks the process of betrayal
as going on. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus had
often resorted thither with
his disciples.</hi> The original
might be rendered more exactly
<q>Jesus and (with) his disciples
often assembled there.</q> We
know from St. Luke xxi. 37,
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
that our Lord on the occasion
of this last visit to Jerusalem
was in the habit of spending
His nights on Mount Olivet,
and the same Evangelist tells
us that, on this occasion after
the Last Supper, <q>going out
he went according to his custom
to the Mount of Olives</q>
(Luke xxii. 39).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Iudas ergo cum accepisset
cohortem, et a pontificibus et
pharisaeis ministros, venit illuc
cum laternis, et facibus, et
armis.</cell>
<cell>3. Judas therefore having
received a band of soldiers,
and servants from the chief
priests and the Pharisees,
cometh thither with lanterns
and torches and weapons.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. <hi rend='bold'>A band of soldiers.</hi> If
<q>the band</q> here means a whole
cohort, it was the tenth part of a
Roman legion, and contained
about six hundred infantry, with
thirty cavalry. The words of
this verse, as well as the presence
of the <q>tribune</q> (verse
12), who was the commander
of a cohort, justify the belief
that a whole cohort was present
on this occasion. Very likely
the authorities were afraid that
a strongly-supported attempt
might be made to save or rescue
Christ from them. This
large body of soldiers, strengthened
by servants or officers of
the temple (ὑπηρέτας) who were
sent by the chief-priests and
Pharisees, came furnished with
arms and lights. As it was
now full moon, this being the
night of the 14th of the lunar
month Nisan, it might seem
that the lights were unnecessary,
but probably the garden
was considerably shaded by
trees, and no doubt it was
feared that Jesus might try to
hide in some dark nook or
lurk beneath the shrubs or
trees.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Iesus itaque sciens omnia
quae ventura erant super eum,
processit, et dixit eis: Quem
quaeritis?</cell>
<cell>4. Jesus therefore knowing
all things that should come
upon him, went forth, and said
to them: Whom seek ye?</cell></row></table>

<p>
4. Christ's foreknowledge is
pointed out, both to prove His
Divinity, and to show His
readiness to suffer. For,
though aware of the sufferings
He was to endure, He did not
seek to escape from them.
He who had before withdrawn
from His enemies (<ref target='VIII_59'>viii. 59</ref>;
<ref target='XII_36'>xii. 36</ref>, &amp;c.), now that His
hour was come, <emph>went forth</emph>
(from the enclosure of the
garden) to meet them.
</p>

<p>
We learn from St. Luke
(xxii. 47) that Judas preceded
the soldiers, and gave the
traitor's kiss to Jesus, thus
marking Him out as the
person to be arrested. We
learn too from St. Matthew
(xxvi. 50), that Jesus addressed
the traitor, even in this hour
of infamy as His friend:
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
<q>Friend, whereto art thou
come?</q> and from St. Luke
(xxii. 48), that He addressed
to him the pathetic words:
<q>Judas, dost thou betray the
Son of Man with a kiss?</q>
After meekly receiving the kiss
from the wretched Apostle,
Jesus addressed the crowd.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. Responderunt ei: Iesum
Nazarenum. Dicit eis Iesus:
Ego sum. Stabat autem et
Iudas qui tradebat eum, cum
ipsis.</cell>
<cell>5. They answered him:
Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus saith
to them: I am he. And
Judas also, who betrayed him,
stood with them.</cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Ut ergo dixit eis, Ego
sum, abierunt retrorsum, et
ceciderunt in terram.</cell>
<cell>6. As soon therefore as he
had said to them: I am he:
they went backward, and fell
to the ground.</cell></row></table>

<p>
5, 6. If our view is correct,
that the traitor's kiss had
preceded Christ's question:
<q>Whom seek ye?</q> then it
would seem that the soldiers
were withheld by Divine power
from at once rushing on Jesus;
and in order to visibly prove
His power and His ability to
escape from them if He wished,
they were stricken to the
ground. This prostration of
Christ's enemies cannot be
explained on natural grounds.
</p>

<anchor id='XVIII_8'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Iterum ergo interrogavit
eos: Quem quaeritis? Illi autem
dixerunt: Iesum Nazarenum.</cell>
<cell>7. Again therefore he asked
them: Whom seek ye? And
they said: Jesus of Nazareth.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Respondit Iesus: Dixi
vobis quia ego sum: si ergo
me quaeritis, sinite hos abire.</cell>
<cell>8. Jesus answered, I have
told you, that I am he. If
therefore you seek me, let
these go their way.</cell></row></table>

<p>
8. <hi rend='bold'>Let these go their
way.</hi> The meaning obviously
is, do not arrest or molest
these My disciples.
</p>

<anchor id='XVIII_9'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>9. Ut impleretur sermo quem
dixit; Quia quos dedisti mihi,
non perdidi ex eis quemquam.</cell>
<cell>9. That the word might be
fulfilled, which he said: Of
them whom thou hast given
me, I have not lost any one.</cell></row></table>

<p>
9. The Evangelist sees in
Christ's care for the safety of
the disciples on this occasion
a fulfilment of His words
recorded in <ref target='XVII_12'>xvii. 12</ref>. It is
true those words as spoken
seem to refer only to the time
then past, but as Christ then
knew that He would continue
to guard the Apostles from
danger during the few hours
of His life that remained, He
meant the words to express
His care for the Apostles up
to the moment of His death,
and therefore on this occasion
at Gethsemani. His present
action was, accordingly, one
fulfilment of what is recorded
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
in <ref target='XVII_12'>xvii. 12</ref>. We believe that
Christ's care for the Apostles
in the present instance regarded
their bodies as well
as their souls. That it
regarded their bodies, may be
fairly concluded from His
words: <q>let these go their
way;</q> and that it regarded
their souls is clear from the
consideration that if arrested
now they would probably have
fallen into sin by denying Him.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>10. Simon ergo Petrus
habens gladium eduxit eum:
et percussit pontificis servum:
et abscidit auriculam eius dexteram.
Erat autem nomen
servo Malchus.</cell>
<cell>10. Then Simon Peter
having a sword, drew it; and
struck the servant of the high-priest,
and cut off his right
ear. And the name of the
servant was Malchus.</cell></row></table>

<p>
10. The Synoptic Evangelists
merely say that <emph>one</emph> of those
who were with Jesus struck
the servant of the high-priest,
but St. John tells us that this
one was Peter. The Synoptists
may have suppressed Peter's
name through fear of inconvenient
consequences to him,
but now that the Prince of the
Apostles was dead, there was
no further reason for such
concealment. We cannot say
whether any other motive than
a desire for historic completeness
prompted St. John to
give, as he does, the servant's
name as well as Peter's.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. Dixit ergo Iesus Petro:
Mitte gladium tuum in vaginam.
Calicem, quem dedit mihi Pater,
non bibam illum?</cell>
<cell>11. Jesus therefore said to
Peter: Put up thy sword into
the scabbard. The chalice
which my Father hath given
me, shall I not drink it?</cell></row></table>

<p>
11. <hi rend='bold'>Put up thy sword into
the scabbard.</hi> The words are
given more fully by St. Matt.
(xxvi. 52, ff). <hi rend='bold'>The chalice ...
shall I not drink it?</hi> In Matt.
xxvi. 39, we read that on this
same night, and in Gethsemani,
before the arrival of Judas,
Christ had prayed: <q>Father,
if it be possible, let this chalice
pass from me;</q> but now, since
it was not to pass, He accepts
it willingly.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Cohors ergo, et tribunus
et ministri Iudaeorum comprehenderunt
Iesum, et ligaverunt
eum:</cell>
<cell>12. Then the band and the
tribune, and the servants of
the Jews, took Jesus, and
bound him:</cell></row></table>

<p>
12. The <hi rend='bold'>tribune</hi> was the
commander of the cohort. χιλιάρχος,
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
strictly taken, means
the commander of one
thousand men. See above
on verse 3.
</p>

<anchor id='XVIII_13'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>13. Et adduxerunt eum ad
Annam primum: erat enim socer
Caiphae, qui erat pontifex
anni illius.</cell>
<cell>13. And they led him away
to Annas first, for he was
father-in-law to Caiphas, who
was high-priest of that year.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. This journey to Annas
is mentioned only by St. John.
Annas, though not the actual
high-priest, was the head of
the Sanhedrim, and a man of
great authority among the
Jews (see above on <ref target='XI_49'>xi. 49</ref>),
and so Jesus was brought
before him in the first instance.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Erat autem Caiphas, qui
consilium dederat Iudaeis:
Quia expedit, unum hominem
mori pro populo.</cell>
<cell>14. Now Caiphas was he
who had given the counsel to
the Jews, that it was expedient
that one man should die for
the people.</cell></row>
<row><cell>15. Sequebatur autem Iesum
Simon Petrus, et alias discipulus.
Discipulus autem ille erat
notus pontifici, et introivit cum
Iesu in atrium pontificis.</cell>
<cell>15. And Simon Peter
followed Jesus, and so did
another disciple. And that
disciple was known to the
high-priest, and went in with
Jesus into the court of the
high-priest.</cell></row></table>

<p>
15. The other disciple was
almost certainly our Evangelist
himself (see <ref target='Intro_I_B_2'>Introd. I. B. 2</ref>);
and the fact that he was
known to the high-priest
makes it probable that he
belonged to a family of some
importance.
</p>

<p>
But who is the high-priest
into whose court Peter and
John followed Jesus? Is it
Caiphas that is meant, or
Annas? Some think the
reference is to Annas, who, it
must be admitted, is called
<q>high-priest</q> by St. Luke
(Luke iii. 2; Acts iv. 6), and
to whom it has just been
stated, in verse 13, that Jesus
was led. But as our Evangelist
has just stated in verse 13,
as he also does in xi. 49, that
Caiphas was high-priest for
that year, we prefer to hold
that the <q>high-priest</q> here
referred to is not Annas, but
Caiphas. We hold, then, that
what is recorded by St. John
in this passage (verses 15-23)
took place in the court of
Caiphas, after Jesus had been
led thither from Annas, and
that verse 24: <q>Annas (<emph>had</emph>)
sent,</q> &amp;c., is added by St.
John to guard the reader
against supposing that what
is recorded in verses 15-23
took place at the house of
Annas. St. Cyril of Alexandria,
and a few Greek and Syrian
MSS. read verse 24 between
verses 13 and 14.
</p>

<p>
In this view the account of
St. John harmonizes at once
with the Synoptic Gospels,
which represent St. Peter's
first denial, recorded in verse
17 here, as taking place in the
court of Caiphas.
</p>

<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>

<p>
Many commentators of note,
such as Patrizzi among
Catholics, and Alford among
Protestants, reconcile St.
John's account with that of
the Synoptic Evangelists in
another way. They hold that
the events recorded in verses
15-23 took place when Jesus
was brought before Annas;
but as Caiphas and Annas
occupied an official residence
in common, or as Annas was,
perhaps, the guest of Caiphas,
his son-in-law, on this night of
the Paschal Supper, though it
was <emph>Annas</emph> who examined
Christ, as recorded by St. John
(verses 10-23), yet it was to
the court of Caiphas, or the
common court attached to the
house of Annas and Caiphas,
that Jesus entered (verse 15);
and there, too, St. Peter denied
His Master for the first time.
In any of the above opinions,
St. John agrees with the Synoptic
Evangelists, that the place
of St. Peter's first denial was
the court of Caiphas: but in
the second opinion, the <q>high
priest</q> of verse 19 is Annas,
not Caiphas. See Patriz., Liber
ii. Adnot. clxxvii.
</p>

<p>
From St. Matthew (xxvi. 59)
and St. Mark (xiv. 55) we learn
that Caiphas was not alone on
this occasion. The whole Sanhedrim
was present; but as
the case was an important one,
this body had to meet again
formally after day-dawn, to
finally decide it. See below on
verse <ref target='XVIII_28'>28</ref>.
</p>

<anchor id='XVIII_16'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Petrus autem stabat ad
ostium foris. Exivit ergo discipulus
alius qui erat notus
pontifici, et dixit ostiariae: et
introduxit Petrum.</cell>
<cell>16. But Peter stood at the
door without. The other
disciple therefore who was
known to the high-priest, went
out, and spoke to the portress,
and brought in Peter.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. <hi rend='bold'>But Peter stood</hi> (was
standing) <hi rend='bold'>at the door without</hi>.
<q>An oriental house is usually
built round a quadrangular
interior court; into which there
is a passage (sometimes arched)
through the front part of the
house, closed next the street by
a heavy folding gate, with a
small wicket for single persons,
kept by a porter. In the text,
the interior court, often paved
or flagged, and open to the sky,
is the αὐλή, where the attendants
made a fire; and the
passage, beneath the front of
the house, from the street to
this court is the προαύλιον (Mark
xiv. 68), or πυλών (Matt. xxvi.
71). The place where Jesus
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
stood before the high-priest
may have been an open room
or place of audience on the
ground-floor, raised somewhat
above the court (Mark xiv. 66)
in the rear or on one side of
the court; such rooms, open in
front, being customary</q> (Robinson,
<hi rend='italic'>Notes to Harmony</hi>).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Dicit ergo Petro ancilla
ostiaria: Numquid et tu ex
discipulis es hominis istius?
Dicit ille: Non sum.</cell>
<cell>17. The maid therefore that
was portress, saith to Peter:
Art not thou also one of this
man's disciples? He saith: I
am not.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17. It will be convenient to
treat of the three denials by
Peter (verses 17, 25-27) together.
Many Rationalist and
Protestant commentators have
alleged that it is impossible to
harmonize the different accounts
of these denials. We hope to
show, however, that there is
little difficulty in harmonizing
them.
</p>

<p>
To this end we would draw
attention, with Dean Alford,<note place='foot'>Fourth Edition, London, 1859.</note>
to the following points:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>In the first place, we are
not bound to require accordance
... in the <emph>recognition</emph>
of Peter <emph>by different persons</emph>.
These may have been <emph>many</emph> on
<emph>each occasion</emph> of denial, and
independent narrators may
have fixed on different ones
among them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Secondly, no reader ...
will require that the <emph>actual words
spoken by Peter</emph> should in each
case be <emph>identically reported</emph>.</q>
In support of this view, Alford
refers to the remarks of
St. Augustine on the words:
<q>Domine, salva nos, perimus</q>
(Matt. viii. 25). <q>What
matters it,</q> says St. Aug., referring
to the different versions
of the words given by the Evangelists,
<q>whether the disciples,
in calling on the Lord, really
used one or another of those
three expressions, or some
other, not recorded by any of
the Evangelists, differing from
all those that are recorded, but
still giving the sense, that
those who called upon Him
were perishing, and called on
Him to save them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Thirdly, I do not see that
we are obliged to limit the
narrative to <emph>three sentences</emph> from
Peter's mouth, <emph>and no more</emph>.
On <emph>three occasions</emph> during the
night he was <emph>recognised</emph>, on
<emph>three occasions he was a denier</emph>
of his Lord: such a statement
may well embrace <emph>reiterated
expressions of recognition</emph>, and
<emph>reiterated and importunate denials
on each occasion</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And those remarks being
taken into account, I premise
that all difficulty is removed,
the resulting inference being
that the narratives are <emph>genuine,
truthful accounts of facts underlying
them all</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Similarly, Patrizzi:&mdash;<q>Considerare
etiam juvat, ut ea difficultas
quam quidam in hac historia
esse putant, quod alter
Evangelista ait Petrum a muliere,
alter a viro, hic ab uno,
ille a pluribus, fuisse interrogatum,
in specie quidem gravis,
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
re tamen ipsa propemodum
nulla sit; ex his enim nihil
aliud consequitur, nisi, non
unum, sed plures, sive simul,
sive alium post alios, Petrum
esse percontatos, hunc autem,
nisi multis ac repetitis interrogationibus
adactum non
respondisse, quod apprime
veri simile est, imo vix dubitandum
de hoc foret, etiamsi
ex evangeliis id minime
colligeretur</q> (Lib. ii. Adnot.
clxxviii.) That the reader may
apply these principles, and
convince himself as to their
sufficiency, we quote from Dr.
Walsh's <hi rend='italic'>Harmony of the Gospel
Narratives</hi>, a tabulated statement
suggesting the chief
points to be attended to in the
four Gospel accounts.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1st Denial:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>St. Matthew.</hi>: There came to him <emph>a maid servant</emph>:
<q>Thou also wast with Jesus the Galilean.</q> <q>I know not what thou sayest.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>St. Mark.</hi>: There cometh to him <emph>one of the maid servants</emph>:
<q>Thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth.</q> <q>I neither know nor understand what
thou sayest.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>St. Luke.</hi>: There came a <emph>certain maid servant</emph>:
<q>This man was also with him.</q> <q>Woman, I know him not.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>St. John.</hi>: And <emph>the maid that was portress</emph> said
to Peter: <q>Art not thou also one of this man's disciples?</q> <q>I am not.</q>
</p>

<p>
2nd Denial:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>St. Matthew.</hi>: <emph>As he went out</emph> to the vestibule,
<emph>another maid</emph> saw him, and she saith to them that were there: <q>This man also
was with Jesus of Nazareth.</q> He denied with an oath: <q>I do not know the man.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>St. Mark.</hi>: And <emph>the maid servant</emph> seeing him, began to
say to the standers by: <q>This is one of them.</q> He denied again.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>St. Luke.</hi>: And <emph>another (Alius)</emph> says: <q>Thou also
art one of them.</q> <q><emph>O man</emph>, I am not.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>St. John.</hi>: Peter was <emph>standing and warming himself</emph>;
and they said to him: <q>Art not thou also one of his disciples?</q> <q>I am not.</q>
</p>

<p>
3rd Denial:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>St. Matthew.</hi>: <emph>They that stood by</emph> said: <q>Surely
thou also art one of them; for even thy speech doth discover thee.</q> He began to curse and
swear that he knew not the man.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>St. Mark.</hi>: <emph>They that stood by</emph> said: <q>Surely
thou art one of them; for thou also art a Galilean.</q> He began to curse and swear,
saying: <q>I know not this man of whom you speak.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>St. Luke.</hi>: <emph>Another man</emph> said: <q>Surely this man was
with him, for he is a Galilean.</q> <q>Man, I know not what thou sayest.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>St. John.</hi>: <emph>One of the servants of the high priest</emph>
saith: <q>Did I not see thee in the garden with him?</q> Peter then denied again.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>

<p>
Thus, it is plain that there
is no difficulty in regard to the
<emph>first</emph> denial, whether we suppose
that St. Peter made use of
the different expressions attributed
to him, or, as seems
more probable in regard to this
first occasion, used only one
expression, which is <emph>substantially</emph>
reported by the four
Evangelists.
</p>

<p>
In regard to the <emph>second</emph> denial
it is to be noted&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That according to SS.
Matthew and Mark the maid
does not address herself to
Peter, but to those who were
around; so that there is no
difficulty when we learn from
St. Luke that Peter was addressed
by a man (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>alius</foreign>) on the
occasion.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) St. Matthew, in the account
of this denial, speaks
of a <emph>different</emph> maid from her
who brought about the first
denial. St. Mark seems to speak
of the <emph>same</emph> maid, for he has
ἡ παιδίσκη (xiv. 69), which
would seem to refer to <emph>the</emph> maid
already mentioned. There is
nothing improbable, however,
in supposing that <emph>two</emph> maids
spoke to those around on the
occasion of the second denial.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) As to the <emph>place</emph> of the
second denial, St. John says
that it occurred while <q>Peter
was standing and warming
himself,</q> while St. Matthew
says it occurred <q>as he went
out to the vestibule,</q> or more
correctly, according to the
Greek, <q>after he <emph>had gone</emph> out</q>
(ἐξελθόντα) into the vestibule.
But again we may readily explain
by saying that on this
occasion Peter was challenged
in <emph>both places</emph>, and denied in
both.
</p>

<p>
In regard to the <emph>third</emph> denial,
the reason given, in St. John, by
the high-priest's servant, for
identifying Peter as a follower
of Jesus, is different from that
given in the other Evangelists;
but there is no difficulty in
supposing that several different
reasons were given by different
persons.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Stabant autem servi et
ministri ad prunas, quia frigus
erat, et calefaciebant se: erat
autem cum eis et Petrus stans,
et calefaciens se.</cell>
<cell>18. Now the servants and
ministers stood at a fire of
coals, because it was cold,
and warmed themselves. And
with them was Peter also
standing, warming himself.</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. We are not to connect
this verse with the preceding,
as if it indicated that Peter was
<emph>standing</emph> during the first denial.
We know from St. Matthew
(xxvi. 69; Comp. Mark xiv.
54; Luke xxii. 55) that he was
<emph>sitting</emph>, and from St. Mark
(xiv. 68) that after the first
denial he went out into the passage
or vestibule (εἰς τὸ προαύλιον).
Hence what St. John
says here is to be understood
in reference to a time
between the first and second
denial.
</p>

<p>
The Greek here is somewhat
different from the Vulgate. It
would be rendered: <q>Now the
servants and the officers were
standing, having made a fire
of charcoal, for it was cold, and
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
they were warming themselves,</q>
&amp;c. The Roman
soldiers had, doubtless, gone
back to their quarters in the
castle of Antonia, close to the
Temple; and hence we find
mention here of only the servants
of the high-priest and
the Temple guards.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Pontifex ergo interrogavit
Iesum de discipulis suis,
et de doctrina eius.</cell>
<cell>19. The high-priest therefore
asked Jesus of his disciples,
and of his doctrine.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. Meantime, while Peter
was denying Him in the court,
Jesus was being examined by
the high-priest in a room or hall
of the house of Caiphas. See
above on verse 16. As we have
said already, we believe that
Caiphas is the <q>high-priest</q>
here referred to; so that St. John
here supplements the account
given by the Synoptic Evangelists
of the preliminary trial,
before Caiphas (Matt, xxvi 59-68;
Mark xiv. 55-65; Luke
xxii. 54-63). From the other
Evangelists we learn that many
false witnesses now appeared
against Jesus; but the inquiry
regarding His <emph>disciples</emph> and
<emph>doctrine</emph> here recorded by
St. John is mentioned by no
other Evangelist.
</p>

<p>
The inquiry regarding
Christ's disciples was probably
intended to find out whether He
had collected these followers
around Him with any seditious
or unlawful object; and that
regarding His doctrine in the
hope of convicting Him from
His own mouth of blasphemy.
Later on in this trial, as we
learn from SS. Matt. and Mark,
they did condemn Him of blasphemy,
and judge Him deserving
of death.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Respondit ei Iesus: Ego
palam locutus sum mundo:
ego semper docui in synagoga,
et in templo, quo omnes Iudaei
conveniunt: et in occulto locutus
sum nihil.</cell>
<cell>20. Jesus answered him:
I have spoken openly to the
world: I have always taught
in the synagogue, and in the
temple, whither all the Jews
resort; and in secret I have
spoken nothing.</cell></row></table>

<p>
20. Jesus makes no reply
regarding His disciples, because
it was sufficiently plain that
they followed Him from no
unworthy motive, but for sake
of His doctrine and its fruits.
Of His doctrine, therefore He
speaks. But since He, of all
teachers (the twice-repeated
ἐγώ is in each instance emphatic)
had taught publicly, and
nothing in private <emph>that was different
from</emph> His public teaching
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
(or the meaning may be, nothing
that He tried to hide), He refers
his interrogator to those who
had heard Him, as their testimony
ought naturally to be
sought rather than His in a
matter that so intimately concerned
Himself.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>21. Quid me interrogas? interroga
eos qui audierunt quid
locutus sim ipsis? ecce hi
sciunt quae dixerim ego.</cell>
<cell>21. Why askest thou me?
ask them who have heard
what I have spoken unto them:
behold they know what things
I have said.</cell></row></table>

<p>
21. <hi rend='bold'>Behold they</hi> (these, οὗτοι)
<hi rend='bold'>know what things I have
said</hi>. Some think that Christ
here referred, perhaps pointed,
to the Priests and Pharisees
around him, or to the crowd in
the court outside; for we know
from St. Luke (xxii. 61) that
those outside in the court were
visible from the hall where
Christ was being examined. It
may be, however, that οὗτοι
refers simply to all and any
who had at any time heard
His doctrine.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Haec autem cum dixisset,
unus assistens ministrorum
dedit alapam Iesu, dicens: Sic
respondes pontifici?</cell>
<cell>22. And when he had said
these things, one of the servants
standing by gave Jesus
a blow, saying: Answerest
thou the high-priest so?</cell></row></table>

<p>
22. <hi rend='bold'>A blow.</hi> <q>Alapa</q> is a
blow on the ear; but the Greek
word (ῥάπισμα) signifies any
blow with the open hand or
with a rod or stick. The blow
was given by one of the Temple
guards.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Respondit ei Iesus: Si
male locutus sum, testimonium
perhibe de malo: si autem
bene, quid me caedis?</cell>
<cell>23. Jesus answered him:
If I have spoken evil, give
testimony of the evil: but if
well, why strikest thou me?</cell></row></table>

<p>
23. <hi rend='bold'>If I have spoken</hi>
(rather, spoke) <hi rend='bold'>evil</hi>. It is not
clear whether the reference is
to the words just uttered in
reply to the high-priest (verse
21), or to the general teaching
of Christ. The use of the aorist
here, just as in verses 20 and
21, is in favour of the latter
view.
</p>

<p>
We have here an example of
Christ's meekness and patience
in very trying circumstances,
a practical application of the
words contained in Matt. v. 39.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Et misit eum Annas ligatum
ad Caipham pontificem.</cell>
<cell>24. And Annas sent him
bound to Caiphas the high-priest.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. <q>Et</q> is not genuine;
the true reading is ἀπέστειλεν
οὖν αὐτόν, <q>Jesus, therefore,
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
had sent him,</q> &amp;c.<note place='foot'><q>Est autem in Graeco sensus hujus sententiae apertior: non enim
habetur particula copulativa, sed illativa, et non est praeteritum, sed aoristus
primus qui saepe plusquam perfecti significationem habet. Sensus ergo est:
<emph>Miserat</emph> igitur eum Annas ligatum ad Caipham Pontificem, est enim locutio
revertentis ad narrationem praetermissam, et particula illativa indicat quae
relata sunt, fuisse facta postquam missus est Christus ab Anna ad Caipham.</q>&mdash;Tol.,
<hi rend='italic'>in loc.</hi></note> We take
it that this is added by St. John
to signify that Jesus <emph>had been</emph>
already sent to Caiphas before
the events recorded in verses
15-23. <q>Misit</q> ought, then,
to be <q>miserat,</q> a sense which
the Aorist ἀπέστειλεν admits.
Compare, for this sense of the
aorist, John iv. 45, 46; xi. 30;
xiii. 12; xix. 23.
</p>

<anchor id='XVIII_25'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Erat autem Simon Petrus
stans, et calefaciens se.
Dixerunt ergo ei: Numquid
et tu ex discipulis eius es?
Negavit ille, et dixit: Non
sum.</cell>
<cell>25. And Simon Peter was
standing, and warming himself.
They said therefore to
him: Art not thou also one of
his disciples? He denied it,
and said: I am not.</cell></row>
<row><cell>26. Dicit ei unus ex servis
pontificis, cognatus eius, cuius
abscidit Petrus auriculam:
Nonne ego te vidi in horto cum
illo?</cell>
<cell>26. One of the servants of
the high-priest (a kinsman to
him whose ear Peter cut off)
saith to him: Did I not see
thee in the garden with him?</cell></row></table>

<p>
25, 26. Here we have St.
John's account of Peter's
second and third denial. See
above on verse 17. We learn
from St. Luke that the third
denial took place about an hour
after the second.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>27. Iterum ergo negavit Petrus:
et statim gallus cantavit.</cell>
<cell>27. Again therefore Peter
denied: and immediately the
cock crew.</cell></row></table>

<p>
27. From St. Mark, who,
being a disciple of St. Peter,
generally records more minutely
the incidents connected
with the Prince of the Apostles,
we learn that the cock crew
after St. Peter's <emph>first</emph> denial,
as well as after the third.
But, as we explained on xiii.
38, the second crowing, which
took place after the third
denial, occurred at the time
ordinarily known as cockcrow,
and to it St. John refers here.
</p>

<anchor id='XVIII_28'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>28. Adducunt ergo Iesum a
Caipha in praetorium. Erat
autem mane: et ipsi non introierunt
in praetorium, ut non
contaminarentur, sed ut manducarent
pascha.</cell>
<cell>28. Then they led Jesus
from Caiphas to the governor's
hall. And it was morning:
and they went not into the
hall, that they might not be
defiled, but that they might
eat the pasch.</cell></row></table>

<p>
28. The Evangelist here
passes over much that had
already been recorded by the
Synoptic Evangelists. From
them we learn that Christ, at
this midnight meeting before
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
the Council, was accused by
false witnesses, convicted of
blasphemy, and judged
deserving of death (Matt.
xxvi. 66; Mark xiv. 64).
Then he was apparently given
over to the charge of the
servants of the high-priest,
was spat upon and struck
with the closed fist (<foreign rend='italic'>colaphis</foreign>)
(Mat. xxvi. 67), and with the
open hand or a stick (ῥαπίσμασιν);
and, being blindfolded, was
mockingly asked to tell who it
was that struck him. Thus
He remained, perhaps, till
daybreak,<note place='foot'>We shall not be far from the truth, if we say that the Paschal Supper began
about 7 p.m.; that Jesus retired to Gethsemani about 10; that He was arrested
between 11 and 12; that the midnight trial was over about 2 a.m.; and that
day dawned about 4.30.</note> mocked and abused
by the servants; though some
think that for a part of the
time He was put into prison.
</p>

<p>
Then when morning was
come, the Synoptic Evangelists
tell us that Jesus was again
brought before the Sanhedrim,
which almost at once decided
to hand him over to Pilate
for punishment. <q>From
Luke (as also, he might have
added, from Matt. xxvii. 1;
Mark xv. 1) we learn that the
night council had been dissolved
and that early again, in the
morning of the last day of our
Lord's life, another more
solemn assembly (rather the
same assembly) was summoned,
at which all the chief-priests
and elders and scribes assisted,
the subject of discussion being
urgent and most important.
It was, besides, a wise Jewish
maxim that legal proceedings
especially in capital cases
should be conducted in the
light of day, and not in the
darkness of night</q> (M'Carthy
on St. Matt. xxvii. 1).
</p>

<p>
It was after this morning
council that Jesus was bound
(Matt. xxvii. 2; Mark xv. 1)
and led before Pilate, as St.
John here narrates. At this
point, when the Lord was
brought before Pilate, and
His death now seemed certain,
Judas, touched with remorse,
but not with true repentance,
brought back the blood-money
to the priests, and flung it in
the temple; then in despair
went and hanged himself
(Matt. xxvii. 3-5).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Then they led Jesus.</hi> The
true reading is: <q>they lead
Jesus therefore.</q> That is to
say, in accordance with their
determination to put Christ to
to death, a determination of
which we are informed by St.
Matthew (xxvii. 1), they bring
Him before the representative
of Roman authority to have
the sentence of death confirmed.
See below on verse
29.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And they went not into
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
the hall</hi> (rather, the governor's
residence, πραιτώριον.) The
Roman Governors ordinarily
dwelt at Caesarea, on the sea
coast; but at the more
important Jewish festivals they
resided in Jerusalem, for the
purpose of preventing or
repressing, if necessary, any
uprising of the Jewish people
against Roman authority
(Josephus, <hi rend='italic'>Bell. Jud.</hi>, ii. 14,
3). When in Jerusalem, they
usually occupied the palace of
Herod the Great on Mount
Sion. A tradition as old as
the fourth century, however,
states that on this occasion
Pilate was staying in the
castle of Antonia, beside the
temple on Mount Moria.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And it was morning</hi>
(πρωΐ). Just as a condemnation
to death at night was technically
illegal according to Jewish
law, so a Roman court could
not be held till after sunrise.
It is likely that the sun was
not long risen on this morning
till the Jews in their eagerness
appeared with their prisoner at
the residence of Pilate. The
term πρωΐ is, in fact, used in
St. Mark xiii. 35, for the fourth
watch of the night.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>That they might not be
defiled, but that they might
eat the pasch.</hi>
</p>

<p>
In our note on <ref target='XIII_1'>xiii. 1</ref> we
held that the Jews, as well
as our Lord, sacrificed the
Paschal lamb on Thursday
evening, and eat it that night;
and hence we hold that <q>the
Pasch</q> here referred to, which
on this Friday morning was
still to be eaten, was not the
Paschal lamb. Had there
been question of the Paschal
Supper proper, then such a
defilement as that contracted
by entering the house of a
Gentile would not have
prevented the Jews from
partaking of the supper; for
it would appear from Lev. xv.
5, where there is question of
a defilement apparently as
serious as that which would
be contracted from entering
the house of a Gentile, that
such defilement continued only
<q>until the evening,</q> and,
therefore, could not be a
hindrance to participation in
the Paschal Supper, which
was eaten <emph>after</emph> the evening,
and when the next Jewish day
had begun.<note place='foot'>Maimonides, <hi rend='italic'>De Pasch.</hi>, vi. 1, says: <q>Qui cadaver reptilis tetigit, aut
reptile, aut <emph>quid aliud simile</emph> die decima quarta, is lavatur, et postquam lotus
est, pro eo pascha mactant, et sub vesperam, quum sol ei occubuit, <emph>pascha
comedit</emph>.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
There is question, then, of
some of the other Paschal
sacrifices which were partaken
of during the seven days of
the Paschal feast (Deut. xvi.
2, 3; 2 Paral. xxx. 22),
perhaps of the special sacrifice
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
known as the Chagigah
(חגיגה).<note place='foot'>We read in the Mishna, which is the oldest portion of the Jewish
Talmud, and was composed about the beginning of the third century: <q>Sacrificium
festi Chagigah (חגיגה) adducebatur ex grege et jumento, agnis et
capris, masculis et feminis; et comedebatur per <emph>duos dies</emph> et unam noctem.</q>
(Mish., <hi rend='italic'>Pesachim</hi>, vi. 4.)</note>
</p>

<p>
From such a sacrifice,
eaten, as we learn from the
Mishna in the note below, not
only at night, but also <emph>during
the day</emph>, a defilement contracted
in the morning would exclude.
</p>

<p>
In view of the anxiety of the
Jews to avoid the legal defilement
incurred by entering a
house from which all leaven
had not been removed, one
cannot help wondering, with
St. Augustine, at their blind
hypocrisy: <q>O impia et stulta
caecitas: habitaculo videlicet
contaminarentur alieno, et non
contaminarentur scelere proprio!</q>
</p>

<anchor id='XVIII_29'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>29. Exivit ergo Pilatus ad
eos foras, et dixit: Quam accusationem
affertis adversus
hominem hunc?</cell>
<cell>29. Pilate therefore went
out to them, and said: What
accusation bring you against
this man?</cell></row>
<row><cell>30. Responderunt, et dixerunt
ei: Si non esset hic malefactor,
non tibi tradidissemus
eum.</cell>
<cell>30. They answered and said
to him: If he were not a
malefactor, we would not
have delivered him up to thee.</cell></row>
<row><cell>31. Dixit ergo eis Pilatus:
Accipite eum vos, et secundum
legem vestram iudicate eum.
Dixerunt ergo ei Iudaei: Nobis
non licet interficere quemquam.
</cell>
<cell>31. Pilate therefore said to
them: Take him you, and
judge him according to your
law. The Jews therefore said
to him: It is not lawful for us
to put any man to death.</cell></row></table>

<p>
29-31. As they entered not,
Pilate, now first mentioned by
St. John, went out to them
and asked: <hi rend='bold'>What accusation
bring you against this man?</hi>
It is very likely he had already
learned something of the
nature of the accusation, either
on the preceding night when the
Roman soldiers were required
for Gethsemani, or just now
before coming out of his house,
but he would naturally wish to
have it made formally. They,
having already pronounced
Jesus deserving of death, and
having brought Him to Pilate
merely to have the sentence of
death pronounced and executed
without any formality of trial,
are indignant at the Roman's
question, and reply as in verse
30: <q>If he were not a malefactor,
we would not have
delivered him up to thee.</q>
Pilate, wishing to shift from
himself responsibility for
Christ's death, bids the Jews
to take Him, and judge Him
according to their own law.
This they declined to do,
alleging as a reason that the
Romans had taken away from
the Jews the power to punish
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
by death. This, however,
was merely an evasion, for
they knew thoroughly that
Pilate's permission in the
present case was sufficient
warrant for their action, even
if they put Jesus to death.
But the motive of the Jewish
leaders was to make the responsibility
for His death, in
the eyes of the Jewish people,
rest upon the Romans.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>32. Ut sermo Iesu impleretur
quem dixit, significans qua
morte esset moriturus.</cell>
<cell>32. That the word of Jesus
might be fulfilled which he
said, signifying what death he
should die.</cell></row></table>

<p>
32. <hi rend='bold'>That the word of
Jesus might be fulfilled.</hi>
The refusal of the Jews to
judge Jesus according to
their own law came to pass,
adds St. John, that the word
of Jesus might be fulfilled, in
which He had foretold that
He should die the death of the
cross (John <ref target='III_14'>iii. 14</ref>; <ref target='XII_32'>xii. 32-34</ref>;
Matt. xx. 19). Had He been
punished according to Jewish
law, having been judged a
blasphemer, He should have
been stoned to death, according
to Levit. xxiv. 14:
<q>Bring forth the blasphemer
without the camp, and let
them that heard him put their
hands upon his head, and let
all the people stone him.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>33. Introivit ergo iterum in
praetorium Pilatus, et vocavit
Iesum, et dixit ei: Tu es rex
Iudaeorum?</cell>
<cell>33. Pilate therefore went
into the hall again, and called
Jesus, and said to him: Art
thou the king of the Jews?</cell></row></table>

<p>
33. It was probably at this
point, after they had refused
to judge Jesus according to
their own law, and when they
saw that Pilate was not at
once proceeding to condemn
Him, that the Jews brought
forward those three distinct
charges against Him, which
St. Luke records: <q>We have
found this man perverting our
nation, and forbidding to give
tribute to Caesar, and saying
that He is Christ the king</q>
(Luke xxiii. 2). Upon this,
Pilate returned into the house,
had Jesus called in<note place='foot'>Jesus till now had been outside, for it is well known the Roman law
required that the criminal should be present to hear the charges brought
against him. See Acts xxiv. 2.</note>, and
questioned Him on the third
count in the indictment just
brought against Him. The
pretension of any Jew to be
the King of Palestine was a
point which, as questioning
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
the sovereignty of Rome, a
Roman governor was bound
to look to. Pilate, therefore,
asked Him: <hi rend='bold'>Art thou the
King of the Jews?</hi> The
words may mean either, <q>Art
thou He who has just now
become notorious under this
title?</q> or, <q>Dost thou claim
the title, as it is said?</q> The
title itself would be likely
to arrest Pilate's attention,
whether he had heard it spoken
of before in connection with
the entry into Jerusalem or
only now from the Jews. And
further, he would rightly
conclude that the title, when
thus put forward, would be
fitted to call out any fanaticism
which there might be in a
political enthusiast. In each
of the four Gospels, the
first words of Pilate to Jesus
are the same: <q>Art thou the
King of the Jews?</q> (Matt.
xxvii. 11; Mark xv. 2; Luke
xxiii. 3). <q>The form of the
sentence (σὺ εἶ) suggests
a feeling of surprise in the
questioner: <q>Art thou, poor,
and bound, and wearied, the
the King of whom men have
spoken?</q> Comp. iv. 12.</q>
Westc. in <hi rend='italic'>Speaker's Commentary</hi>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>34. Respondit Iesus: A temetipso
hoc dicis, an alii dixerunt
tibi de me?</cell>
<cell>34. Jesus answered: Sayest
thou this thing of thyself, or
have others told it thee of me?</cell></row></table>

<p>
34. To Pilate's question,
Christ replies: Sayest thou
this of thyself, from thy own
knowledge or suspicion of My
having taken part in seditious
practices, or is it merely
because of what others, through
envy and jealousy, have now
told thee of Me? These words
were, doubtless, intended to
remind Pilate that, although
Governor of Judea during all
the time of Christ's public life
(Luke iii. 1), he had no reason
from his own personal knowledge
to find fault with Jesus.
Hence, he ought to suspect the
charges that had been made.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>35. Respondit Pilatus: Numquid
ego Iudaeus sum? Gens
tua et pontifices tradiderunt te
mihi: quid fecisti?</cell>
<cell>35. Pilate answered: Am I
a Jew? Thy own nation and
the chief priests have delivered
thee up to me: what hast
thou done?</cell></row></table>

<p>
35. Pilate impatiently replies,
signifying that as he was not
a Jew, he might easily be
ignorant of Christ's guilt,
while it would be well known
to Christ's countrymen who
now accused Him.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>36. Respondit Iesus: Regnum
meum non est de hoc
mundo: si ex hoc mundo esset
regnum meum, ministri mei
utique decertarent ut non traderer
Iudaeis: Nunc autem
regnum meum non est hinc.</cell>
<cell>36. Jesus answered: My
kingdom is not of this world.
If my kingdom were of this
world, my servants would
certainly strive that I should
not be delivered to the Jews:
but now my kingdom is not
from hence.</cell></row></table>

<p>
36. In response to Pilate's
question: <q>What hast thou
done?</q> Jesus proceeds to
explain that His is not that
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
mighty temporal kingdom for
which the Jews had hoped, and
which the Romans might well
fear; if it were, His followers
would surely have striven that
He should not be delivered to
the Jews; but in truth it was
not a temporal kingdom.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>My kingdom is not from
hence</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> is not <emph>of this world</emph>,
not a temporal kingdom. <emph>In</emph>
this world it was, and is; but
<emph>of</emph> this world it is not. See
xvii. <ref target='XVII_15'>15</ref>, <ref target='XVII_16'>16</ref>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>37. Dixit itaque et Pilatus:
Ergo rex es tu? Respondit
Iesus: Tu dicis quia rex sum
ego. Ego in hoc natus sum,
et ad hoc veni in mundum, ut
testimonium perhibeam veritati:
omnis qui est ex veritate,
audit vocem meam.</cell>
<cell>37. Pilate therefore said to
him: Art thou a king then?
Jesus answered: Thou sayest
that I am a king. For this
was I born, and for this came
I into the world: that I should
give testimony to the truth.
Every one that is of the truth,
heareth my voice.</cell></row></table>

<p>
37. <hi rend='bold'>Art thou a king then?</hi>
Pilate asked; to which Jesus
replied: <q>Thou sayest it</q>
(Matt., Mark, Luke); or, as
here, <q>Thou sayest that I am
a king,</q><note place='foot'>We prefer to render: <q>Thou sayest it, <emph>for</emph> (ὅτι) I am a king;</q> and thus
St. John's version of Christ's reply is more like that of the other Evangelists.</note> meaning thou sayest
truly, what is the fact. That
this is the sense of the phrase,
see Matt. xxvi. 64, and compare
with Mark xiv. 61. Then,
having made this admission,
Jesus at once proceeds to point
out the spiritual character of
the kingdom which He had
come to establish. That kingdom
is His Church, which was
established, not amid the clash
of arms or din of battle, but
by the preaching of the truth,
and to which all belong,
whether Jew or Roman, who
hear the truth.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>38. Dicit et Pilatus: Quid
est Veritas? Et cum hoc dixisset, iterum exivit ad Iudaeos,
et dicit eis: Ego nullam invenio
in eo causam.</cell>
<cell>38. Pilate saith to him:
What is truth? And when he
said this he went out again to
the Jews, and saith to them:
I find no cause in him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
38. At the mention of <q>the
truth,</q> Pilate asks: <hi rend='bold'>What is
truth?</hi> (ἀλήθεια, without the
article). The question was not
asked for information, for
Pilate went out without waiting
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
for an answer, but impatiently
or sneeringly, as if he
said: <q>Yes, but what <emph>is</emph>
truth?</q> Then Pilate went out
again to the Jews, and told
them that he could find in Jesus
no reason for condemning Him.
</p>

<p>
Then it was, probably, that
as St. Luke tells us: <q>They
were more earnest, saying: He
stirreth up the people, teaching
throughout all Judea, beginning
from Galilee to this place</q>
(Luke xxiii. 5). <q>Amid their
confused and passionate exclamation,
the practised ear of
Pilate caught the name of <q>Galilee,</q>
and he understood that
Galilee had been the chief scene
of the ministry of Jesus. Eager
for a chance of dismissing a
business of which he was
best pleased to be free, he proposed,
by a master-stroke of
astute policy, to get rid of an
embarrassing prisoner, to save
himself from a disagreeable
decision, and to do an unexpected
complaisancy to the
unfriendly Galilean tetrarch,
who, as usual, had come to
Jerusalem&mdash;nominally to keep
the Passover, really to please
his subjects, and to enjoy the
sensations and festivities
offered at that season by
the densely-crowded capital</q>
(Farrar).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>39. Est autem consuetudo
vobis, ut unum dimittam vobis
in pascha: vultis ergo dimittam
vobis regem Iudaeorum?</cell>
<cell>39. But you have a custom
that I should release one unto
you at the pasch: will you
therefore that I release unto
you the king of the Jews?</cell></row>
<row><cell>40. Clamaverunt ergo rursum
omnes dicentes: Non
hunc, sed Barabbam. Erat
autem Barabbas latro.</cell>
<cell>40. Then cried they all again,
saying: Not this man, but
Barabbas. Now Barabbas
was a robber.</cell></row></table>

<p>
39. Then, after Herod had examined
and mocked Christ, he
sent Him back to Pilate (Luke
xxiii. 8-12); and now it was,
after the return from Herod,
that Pilate thought of releasing
Jesus, in accordance with his
custom of releasing a prisoner
every year at the festival of the
Pasch.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Will you, therefore, that I
release unto you the king of
the Jews?</hi> or as St. Matt. has:
<q>Whom will you that I release
to you; Barabbas, or Jesus,
that is called Christ?</q> (Matt.
xxvii. 17). Barabbas, as we
learn from the Synoptic Evangelists,
was a <q>notorious
prisoner,</q> <q>who was put in
prison with some seditious men,
who, in the sedition, had committed
murder.</q> Pilate hoped,
therefore, that the release of
Jesus rather than of a notorious
criminal like Barabbas would
be called for. But the people,
instigated by the chief-priests
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
and elders (Matt. xxvii. 20),
blindly called for the release of
Barabbas.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>A robber.</hi> (λῃιστής), one
who appropriates the goods of
another by open violence, as
opposed to the thief (κλέπτης),
who takes what is not his own,
secretly and by fraud.
</p>

<p>
We have followed the view
held by Patrizzi and the majority
of commentators, that Pilate
on only <emph>one occasion</emph>, and after
the return from Herod, proposed
our Lord to the Jews as the
prisoner to be released. Others,
as Father Coleridge and
Dr. Walsh, hold that on <emph>two</emph>
different occasions, once before
the journey to Herod, as recorded
by St. John, and once
after, as recorded by the Synoptic
Evangelists, Christ was
proposed by Pilate as the
prisoner to be released. But
we are not convinced by the
reasons urged in favour of this
view. It is argued&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) from
the fact that in St. John the
question of releasing a prisoner
is first mentioned by Pilate,
while in the Synoptic Evangelists
the question of having
a prisoner released to them is
first moved by the people. But
we say, in reply, that there is
nothing in the Synoptic accounts
which forbids us to
suppose that Pilate first mentioned
the matter, as in St.
John: <q>You have a custom
that I should release one unto
you at the Pasch;</q> that then
they called upon him to observe
the custom on that occasion,
and that he forthwith put
before them the choice between
Jesus and Barabbas. Certainly
St. Matt. (xxvii. 17) as well as
St. John represents Pilate as
the first to refer to the matter.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Father Coleridge argues
also from the fact that Pilate,
in St. Matt., says to the Jews:
<q>Whom will you that I release
to you; Barabbas, or Jesus,
that is called Christ?</q> <q>That
he mentions Barabbas along
with our Lord,</q> says Father
Coleridge, <q>can only be
explained by the fact that, as
St. John mentions, Barabbas
had been already called for by
the priests and crowd, when
Pilate had, for the first time,
spoken of the custom.</q> But
it seems to us that the mention
of Barabbas by Pilate is
sufficiently explained by the
fact which St. Matthew himself
had just mentioned in the
preceding verse, that Barabbas
was a <q>notorious prisoner;</q>
and hence his name was more
familiar to Pilate than the
names of the other prisoners.
Moreover his well-known guilt
encouraged Pilate to hope
that if the choice lay between
him and Jesus, the Jews would
surely call for the release of
our Lord.
</p>

<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>

<p>
Before quitting this chapter,
it may be well to point out the
different tribunals, before
which, as we have seen, Jesus
was led on this last night and
morning of His mortal life.
</p>

<p>
(1) First, then, He was led
from Gethsemane before Annas.
</p>

<p>
(2) He was led before
Caiphas.
</p>

<p>
(3) When day dawned, He
was led before the Sanhedrim.
</p>

<p>
(4) He was led before
Pilate.
</p>

<p>
(5) He was led before
Herod Antipas.
</p>

<p>
(6) On His return from
Herod, He was again led
before Pilate.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIX.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-5. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus is scourged, crowned with thorns, clothed with a purple
garment, and mockingly saluted by the soldiers as King of the
Jews; then shown to the people.</hi>
</p>

<p>
6-7. <hi rend='bold'>The people, led on by the Priests and their servants, demand
Christ's death.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>8-12. Pilate becomes still more unwilling to interfere with Jesus, and
again examines Him, and makes known his intention of
releasing Him.</hi>
</p>

<p>
13-16. <hi rend='bold'>Then the Jews charge him with disloyalty to the Roman
Emperor, and at length Pilate gives way and delivers Jesus to
be crucified.</hi>
</p>

<p>
17-22. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus is led to Calvary, and crucified between two robbers.</hi>
</p>

<p>
23-24. <hi rend='bold'>The soldiers divide His other garments among four of them,
but cast lots for His tunic.</hi>
</p>

<p>
25-27. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus gives John to the Blessed Virgin as her son, and her in
turn to him as his mother.</hi>
</p>

<p>
28-30. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus, having partaken of the vinegar which was offered to Him
in a soaked sponge, dies.</hi>
</p>

<p>
31-37. <hi rend='bold'>The legs of the two robbers are broken, and the side of Jesus
pierced with a lance.</hi>
</p>

<p>
38-42. <hi rend='bold'>Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus embalm and bury the body
of Jesus.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Tunc ergo apprehendit
Pilatus Iesum, et flagellavit.</cell>
<cell>1. Then, therefore Pilate
took Jesus, and scourged him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. After he had released Barabbas,
Pilate now thought of
another but a cruel means of
saving the life of Jesus. He had
Him scourged, hoping thus to
satisfy the fury of His enemies
(Luke xxiii. 22). Then was
fulfilled the prophecy of Isaias:
<q><hi rend='italic'>I have given my body to the
strikers</hi>, and My cheeks to them
that plucked them: I have not
turned away my face from them
that rebuked me, and spat upon
me</q> (Isaias 1. 6).
</p>

<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>

<p>
Had Christ been scourged by
Jewish authority, according to
the Jewish law He should not
have received more than forty
stripes. <q>According to the
measure of the sin shall the
measure also of the stripes
be: Yet so that they exceed
not the number of forty: lest
thy brother depart shamefully
torn before thy eyes</q>
(Deut. xxv. 2, 3). By Jewish
practice the number of stripes
was restricted to thirty-nine
(See 2 Cor. xi. 24). But as the
scourging was ordered by
Pilate, it was, doubtless, inflicted
according to the cruel
Roman method, in which there
was no limit to the number of
stripes that might be inflicted.
The word used by the Greek
translator of St. Matthew and
by St. Mark in reference to this
scourging is φραγελλώσας,
which, like that used by St.
John (ἐμαστίγωσεν), signifies a
scourging with whips or flagella<note place='foot'>φραγελλόω indeed belongs to late Greek, and is derived from the Latin
flagellum.</note>
(not <emph>rods</emph>, which were
sometimes used by the Romans;
Acts xvi. 22. Comp. 2 Cor. xi.
25). The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>flagellum</foreign> was chiefly
used in the punishment of
slaves. It was made of cords
or thongs of leather, knotted
with bones or circles of bronze,
or pieces of hard wood, and
sometimes terminated by hooks
in which latter case it was called
a scorpion. No wonder that
Horace (<hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> 1, 3, 119) speaks
of it as <q>horribile flagellum.</q>
It was with this brutal instrument
of torture, then, that our
Lord was mangled on this
morning by the fierce Roman
soldiers.
</p>

<p>
The pillar to which according
to tradition our Lord was tied
while being scourged, was
brought from Jerusalem to
Rome, in 1223 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> <q>In a
small shrine to the right of the
chapel (in the Church of St.
Praxedes on the Esquiline, near
St. Mary Major's), is preserved
the marble pillar to which our
Lord is said to have been bound.
It measures two feet three
inches in height, not including
its circular pedestal, which is
two inches high; its lower diameter
is one foot and a-half, its
upper is only nine inches, and
its top was attached to a ring,
the perforation for which remains</q>
(Dr. Donovan's <hi rend='italic'>Rome,
Ancient and Modern</hi>).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. Et milites plectentes corronam
de spinis, imposuerunt
capiti eius: et veste purpurea
circumdederunt eum.</cell>
<cell>2. And the soldiers platting
a crown of thorns, put it upon
his head: and they put on him
a purple garment.</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. There is a difficulty here
when we compare this verse
with Matt. xxvii. 26-29; Mark
xv. 15-18. For, while St.
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
John here represents the
crowning with thorns<note place='foot'>We know not what kind of thorns was used for the crown. Benedict
XIV. says that in his time it could not be decided from any relics of the
thorns known to exist to what species they belonged.</note> and the
incident of the cloak as
<emph>preceding</emph> the sentence of
death (see verse 16), SS.
Matthew and Mark seem to
say that they followed it.
</p>

<p>
Hence, some have held that
Christ was twice crowned
with thorns and clad with a
cloak, and hailed as King of
the Jews: once before the
sentence as signified here, and
once after as indicated by SS.
Matthew and Mark.
</p>

<p>
But it seems the more
probable opinion that these
events occurred only once, and
before the sentence was passed,
as St. John records. In this
view, SS. Matthew and Mark
do not record these events and
the sentence in the order in
which they occurred.<note place='foot'><q>Jesus igitur flagellis caesus spinisque coronatus fuit, ante quam Pilatus
eum capite damnaret. Non ergo est dubium, ordinem in his referendis a
Matthaeo et a Marco minime esse observatum.</q>&mdash;Patriz.</note> We
would suggest, in support of
this view, that these Evangelists,
in recording the sentence
by which Barabbas recovered
his liberty (Matt. xxvii. 26;
Mark xv. 15), depart from the
order of time to record in
connection with the liberation
of Barabbas the condemnation
of Jesus. Thus the sentence
of death, though following the
crowning with thorns is represented
in the two first
Gospels as preceding it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>A purple garment.</hi> If it be
objected that while the cloak
according to St. John was
<emph>purple</emph>, according to St.
Matthew it was <emph>scarlet</emph>, we
reply that the same difficulty
occurs on a comparison of St.
Matthew with St. Mark, for
the latter also says the cloak
was <emph>purple</emph>; and yet all admit
that SS. Matthew and Mark
refer to the same occasion.
In reality, the two Greek
words translated purple and
scarlet seem to have been
frequently interchanged.
</p>

<p>
<q>Πορφύρα is vaguely used to
signify different shades of red,
and is especially convertible
with crimson = κοκκίνη, Matt.</q>
(Alf. on St. Mark xv. 17).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Et veniebant ad eum, et
dicebant: Ave rex Iudaeorum:
Et dabant ei alapas.</cell>
<cell>3. And they came to him,
and said: Hail, king of the
Jews, and they gave him blows.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. <hi rend='bold'>Hail, king of the Jews.</hi>
The soldiers had derisively
arrayed Him in the insignia of
royalty; nothing was wanting
but the mockery of their homage;
this they now offer. St.
Matthew is more explicit:
<q>And bowing the knee before
him, they mocked him, saying:
Hail, king of the Jews</q> (Matt.
xxvii. 29).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And they gave him blows.</hi>
From St. Matthew we learn,
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
too, that <q>spitting upon him,
they took the reed, and struck
his head</q> (Matt. xxvii. 30).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Exivit ergo iterum Pilatus
foras, et dicit eis: Ecce adduco
vobis eum foras, ut cognoscatis
quia nullam invenio in eo
causam.</cell>
<cell>4. Pilate therefore went
forth again, and saith to them:
Behold I bring him forth unto
you, that you may know that
I find no cause in him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
4. Pilate now brought Jesus
forth, hoping that the wretched
plight to which our Saviour had
been reduced, that the mockery
and degradation and suffering
to which He had been subjected,
would satisfy them, and with
this view he says to them in
effect: Behold I bring Him
forth to you that I may
make known to you again
that I can find no reason for
condemning Him; see, then,
the miserable state to which
He is reduced, and be satisfied.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. (Exivit ergo Iesus portans
coronam spineam, et purpureum
vestimentum). Et dicit
eis: Ecce homo.</cell>
<cell>5. Jesus therefore came
forth bearing the crown of
thorns, and the purple garment.
And he saith to them: Behold
the Man.</cell></row></table>

<p>
5. This verse gives us
the graphic description of an eye-witness.
<hi rend='bold'>Behold the Man.</hi>
<q>Behold</q> is an interjection, not
a verb. It it were a verb, <q>man</q>
would be in the accusative
case governed by it. This,
indeed, is what is suggested
by our translation and punctuation:
<q>Behold the Man.</q>
But in the original, <q>man</q>
is in the nominative case
(ὁ ἄνθρωπος), and the meaning
is: Behold, here before you is
<emph>the Man</emph>.
</p>

<anchor id='XIX_6'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Cum ergo vidissent eum
pontifices et ministri clamabant
dicentes: Crucifige, crucifige
eum, Dicit eis Pilatus: accipite
cum vos et crucifigite: ego
enim non invenio in eo causam.</cell>
<cell>6. When the chief priests
therefore and the servants had
seen him, they cried out,
saying: Crucify him, crucify
him. Pilate saith to them:
Take him you, and crucify
him; for I find no cause in
him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
6. As soon as Jesus appeared,
the chief-priests and the
ministers at once raised the
savage cry, fearing lest the
sight of His bleeding and
mangled body might melt the
hearts of the people.
</p>

<p>
Pilate's words: <hi rend='bold'>Take him,
you, and crucify him</hi>, are
thought by some to be ironical,
as if he said: Take him you,
if you dare. We prefer, however,
to understand the words,
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
like the similar words in verse
<ref target='XVIII_29'>xviii. 31</ref>, as the expression of
his desire to please the Jews.
He was convinced that Jesus
was innocent, and was unwilling
himself to condemn
Him; yet, to please the Jews,
he would permit them to put
Him to death.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Responderunt ei Iudaei:
Nos legem habemus, et secundum
legem debet mori, quia
Filium Dei se fecit.</cell>
<cell>7. The Jews answered him:
We have a law; and according
to the law he ought to die,
because he made himself the
Son of God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. <hi rend='bold'>The Jews answered
him: We have a law.</hi> The
Jews reply, that though the
Roman governor sees nothing
in Him for which to condemn
Him, yet, according to their
law, Jesus has incurred the
penalty of death: <q>He that
blasphemeth the name of the
Lord, dying let him die; all
the multitude shall stone him</q>
(Lev. xxiv. 16).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Because he made himself
the Son of God.</hi> Note here
that the Jews understood Christ
to have claimed to be the <emph>natural</emph>
Son of God. Had they understood
Him to speak of Himself
merely as an adopted son,
they could not have blamed
Him, for the just are frequently
spoken of in the Old Testament
as sons of God. From St. Luke
xxiii. 2, then, we know that
the Jews understood Jesus to
claim to be <q>Christ, the King;</q>
that is to say, to be the
Messias; and from the verse
before us we learn that they
understood Him to claim to be
the Son of God. As such then,
and for such claims on His
part, He was put to death;
and the fact that He chose
rather to die, than explain away
or withdraw these claims,
proves that He was understood
correctly.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>8. Cum ergo audisset Pilatus
hunc sermonem, magis timuit.</cell>
<cell>8. When Pilate therefore
had heard this saying, he
feared the more.</cell></row></table>

<p>
8. <hi rend='bold'>He feared the more.</hi>
When Pilate heard that Christ
claimed to be the Son of God,
he became <emph>more</emph> afraid to interfere
with or condemn Him.
Already her dream which
Pilate's wife had made known
to him (Matt. xxvii. 19), and
the majesty, serenity, and evident
innocence of Jesus, must
have greatly impressed the
governor.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>9. Et ingressus est praetorium
iterum, et dixit ad Iesum:
Unde es tu? Iesus autem
responsum non dedit ei.</cell>
<cell>9. And he entered into the
hall again, and he said to
Jesus: Whence art thou?
But Jesus gave him no answer.</cell></row></table>

<p>
9. Again, therefore, he
entered the palace (πραιτώριον).
Jesus, too, was led in, and Pilate
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
questioned Him in reference
to the accusation just made
against Him. You have been
charged with claiming to be
the Son of God: <hi rend='bold'>Whence art
thou?</hi> from heaven, or of
earth, like other men? Pilate
was unworthy of an answer,
or else Jesus thought it useless
to explain to one who would
not understand or believe it
His eternal generation from
the Father, and accordingly
He was silent.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>10. Dicit ergo ei Pilatus:
Mihi non loqueris? nescis quia
potestatem habeo crucifigere te
et potestatem habeo dimittere
te?</cell>
<cell>10. Pilate therefore saith to
him: Speakest thou not to me?
knowest thou not that I have
power to crucify thee, and I
have power to release thee?</cell></row></table>

<p>
10. <hi rend='bold'>Speakest thou not to
me?</hi> In the original the pronoun,
standing at the head of
the clause, is emphatic. Speakest
thou not <emph>to me</emph>, the representative
of Roman power,
who have authority (ἐξουσίαν)
to liberate or crucify thee?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Knowest thou not that I
have power</hi>, &amp;c. The more
probable order of the clauses
is: <q>I have power to release
thee, and I have power to crucify
thee,</q> the motive of hope
standing before that of fear.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. Respondit Iesus: Non
haberes potestatem adversum
me ullam, nisi tibi datum esset
desuper. Propterea qui me
tradidit tibi, maius peccatum
habet.</cell>
<cell>11. Jesus answered: Thou
shouldest not have any power
against me, unless it were
given thee from above. Therefore
he that hath delivered me
to thee, hath the greater sin.</cell></row></table>

<p>
11. Pilate's claim to unlimited
power over Him makes
Jesus again break silence. His
words are an implicit admission
that Pilate possesses power
over Him, but at the same
time a reminder that there
was One greater than even
a Roman governor, without
whose permission Pilate could
do nothing against Him.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Unless it were given thee
from above.</hi> From the original,
in which we have ἦν δεδομένον,
not ἦν δεδομένη (datum,
not data), it is clear that the
verb has not <q>power</q> for its
subject, but is to be taken impersonally:
Unless it were
given thee from above <emph>to have
such power</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<q>From above</q> has been
taken by some to refer to the
Sanhedrim, as if Christ here
referred to it as a higher tribunal
than Pilate's; but this
view cannot be admitted. Not
only is it opposed to the ordinary
sense of ἄνωθεν (iii. 31; James i.
17; iii. 15, 17), but it would
make our Lord say that Pilate
had received his power from
the Sanhedrim&mdash;a statement
which would not be correct.
<q>From above</q>, then, means:
from heaven or from God.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Therefore he that hath
delivered</hi> (παραδούς, not παραδιδούς)
<hi rend='bold'>me to thee hath the
greater sin</hi>. Some, as Kuinoel,
hold that διὰ τοῦτο is here
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
merely a formula of transition
(like the Hebrew לבן, Judg. viii.
7, &amp;c.), of which no account is
to be taken. The meaning is
then sufficiently clear. But if,
as most commentators take
for granted, we are to give
διὰ τοῦτο its ordinary inferential
force, the connection
is very obscure, and has been
variously explained.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Some thus: Because you
exercise your power <emph>unwillingly</emph>
therefore your sin is less than
that of Caiphas and the Sanhedrim,
who have delivered me
to you, and are forcing you to
condemn me. But it is rightly
objected against this interpretation,
that the word <q>unwillingly,</q>
upon which it turns,
is neither expressed nor suggested
in the text.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Others thus: Since you
have received from God power
over Me, <emph>but have not had
an opportunity of judging of My
character</emph>, therefore your sin is
less than that of Caiphas and
the Sanhedrim, who with the
clearest evidences of My
Divinity before them have yet
condemned Me and delivered
Me to you. But it is objected
to this view also, that the words
upon which the interpretation
hinges, are not found in the
text.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Others thus: since you
possess lawful authority, therefore
the Sanhedrim is more
guilty in handing Me over to
you than it would be, if you
possessed not this authority.
For, in handing Me over to
you, they try to brand Me as a
malefactor, and they surrender
Me to one who has the power
to put Me to death, even by
the cruel death of crucifixion.
In this view, held by Toletus,
the sin of the Sanhedrim is
compared, not with that of
Pilate, but with what their own
sin would have been, had they
merely brought Jesus before
some unlawful tribunal.
</p>

<p>
The last connection, though,
perhaps, not sufficiently obvious,
is the most natural. The
meaning of the whole verse is:
You have lawful authority indeed,
but not independently of
God; and since you have lawful
authority, therefore, My
accusers are the more guilty.
</p>

<p>
The words <q>he that hath
delivered me to thee</q> refer
primarily to Caiphas, the high-priest,
but include the Sanhedrim
with him in the responsibility
for delivering up Christ.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Et exinde quaerebat
Pilatus dimittere eum. Iudaei
autem clamabant, dicentes:
Si hunc dimittis, non es amicus
Caesaris: omnis enim qui se
regem facit contradicit Caesari.</cell>
<cell>12. And from thenceforth
Pilate sought to release him.
But the Jews cried out, saying:
If thou release this man, thou
art not Cesar's friend. For
whosoever maketh himself a
king, speaketh against Cesar.</cell></row></table>

<p>
12. <hi rend='bold'>And from thenceforth
Pilate sought to release him.</hi>
Pilate, who had hitherto tried
to shirk the trial of Jesus, or to
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
induce the Jews to call for His
release, now <q>sought</q> himself
to release Him. At this juncture,
when all other motives
had failed to move Pilate, the
Jews exasperated charge him
with being the enemy of
Cæsar, if he refuse to condemn
one who claimed to be a sovereign
within Cæsar's dominions.
Their words conveyed
to Pilate that they would denounce
him to Cæsar, in case
he persisted in refusing to
condemn Jesus. Tiberius
(14-37 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), who was Roman
Emperor at the time, was,
according to Suetonius (Vit.
Tib., c. 58), a most suspicious
tyrant, and one with whom, as
Tacitus tells us: <q>Majestatis
crimen omnium accusationum
complementum erat</q> (Ann.
iii. 38).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>13. Pilatus autem cum audisset
hos sermones, adduxit
foras Iesum: et sedit pro
tribunali, in loco qui dicitur
Lithostrotos, hebraice autem
Gabbatha.</cell>
<cell>13. Now when Pilate had
heard these words, he brought
Jesus forth; and sat down in
the judgment seat, in the place
that is called Lithostrotos, and
in Hebrew Gabbatha.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. Now when Pilate had
heard these words, he brought
Jesus forth. Pilate, through
fear of the Emperor, at length
gave way, and Jesus, who had
remained within the house after
the interrogation (verses 9-11),
while Pilate was signifying his
own intention to the people
(verse 12), was now brought
forth, and Pilate formally took
his seat to pass sentence of
death.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>In the place that is called
Lithostrotos, and in Hebrew
Gabbatha.</hi> The Rev. Vers.
renders: <q>At a place called
the Pavement, but in Hebrew
Gabbatha.</q> The judgment-seat
was usually in front of the
Praetorium, on an elevated
platform. The Syro-Chaldaic
word Gabbatha means <hi rend='italic'>a high
place</hi>, probably from the root
גבה (Gabhah), and such high
places were usually paved with
many-coloured stones, hence
the name <q>Lithostrotos</q> (from
λίθος, a stone, and στρωτός,
covered, or paved). Suetonius
(Caes. 8, 46) says that Julius
Cæsar carried such a pavement
with him on his expeditions.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Erat autem parasceve paschae, hora
quasi sexta,
et dicit Iudaeis:
Ecce rex vester.</cell>
<cell>14. And it was the parasceve
of the pasch, about
the sixth hour,
and he saith to the Jews:
Behold your king.</cell></row></table>

<p>
14. <hi rend='bold'>And it was the parasceve
of the Pasch.</hi> <q>Parasceve</q>
(Gr. παρασκευή) means
<emph>preparation</emph>, or <emph>day of preparation</emph>,
and the expression: <q>the
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
parasceve of the Pasch</q> <emph>might</emph>
mean the day of preparation
for the Paschal feast, and hence
the day <emph>before</emph> the feast began.
This, indeed, is the meaning
given to the phrase by all those
who hold that Christ, in the last
year of His mortal life, celebrated
the Paschal Supper a day
before the Jews.<note place='foot'>See above on <ref target='XIII_1'>xiii. 1</ref>.</note> They hold
that St. John here signifies
that the Jewish Pasch had not
yet begun. But the phrase
may have, and we believe has,
a different meaning. We know
from St. Mark that <q>Parasceve</q>
was another name for
Friday; <q>It was the Parasceve,
that is, the day before the Sabbath</q>
(Mark xv. 42). Friday
naturally enough got this name,
because it was the <emph>day of preparation</emph>
for the Jewish Sabbath.
</p>

<p>
By <q>the parasceve of the
Pasch,</q> then, we understand
the Friday of the Paschal week,
and we take it that St. John here
indicates the day of the week,
as in the words immediately
following he indicates the hour
of the day. His readers, some
of whom were, doubtless,
acquainted with the Synoptic
Gospels, would be already
aware that this day was the
first of the Paschal week, and
not the eve of the festival. See
above on <ref target='XIII_1'>xiii. 1</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>About the sixth hour.</hi> A
very great difficulty arises from
a comparison of this account
with that of St. Mark. For
St. Mark says: <q>And it was
the <emph>third</emph> hour, and they crucified
Him.... And when the sixth
hour was come, there was darkness
over the whole earth until
the ninth hour</q> (Mark xv.
25, 33).
</p>

<p>
Thus, while St. John represents
our Lord as <emph>condemned</emph>
about the <emph>sixth</emph> hour, St. Mark represents
Him as already <emph>crucified</emph>
at the <emph>third</emph> hour. How, it is
asked, could He be crucified at
the <emph>third</emph> hour, if He was not
condemned till the <emph>sixth</emph>?
</p>

<p>
Many solutions of this difficulty
have been proposed, but
some of them are so improbable,
that we will not delay
upon them. When, for instance,
St. Augustine says that St.
Mark, in stating that the Jews
crucified Jesus at the third
hour, means that at that time
they crucified Him with their
<emph>tongues</emph> by calling for His crucifixion,
it is plain from the
whole context of St. Mark that
such a view cannot be admitted;
because he evidently speaks of
the real nailing of Jesus to the
cross. Thus he says: <q>And
it was the third hour, and they
crucified him. And the inscription
of his cause was
written over, <hi rend='italic'>The King of the
Jews</hi>. And with him they
crucify two thieves, the one on
his right hand, and the other
on his left.... And they that
passed by blasphemed him,
wagging their heads, and saying:
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
... save thyself, coming
down from the cross</q> (Mark
xv. 25-30).
</p>

<p>
But, setting aside the less
probable methods of reconciliation,
we must notice four which
have found favour with commentators.
</p>

<p>
(1) Maldonatus and many of
the older commentators hold
that besides the division of the
Jewish day into twelve hours,
there was also another division
into four periods, corresponding
to the four watches of the
night.<note place='foot'>That a division of the night into four watches existed, is proved from the
New Testament. See, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Mark xiii. 35: Luke xii. 38.</note> Thus, at the Pasch,
which occurred about the time
of the vernal equinox, these
four periods, or <q>hours,</q> would
be respectively&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) from 6 to 9
a.m.; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) from 9 a.m. to noon;
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) from noon to 3 p.m.; and
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) from 3 to 6 p.m. According to
Mald., these periods were called
respectively, the third, sixth,
ninth, and twelfth <q>hour.</q>
He curiously supposes, however,
that sometimes any one
of these <q>hours</q> or periods
was referred to either by the
name of the hour with which it
began, or by the name of that
with which it closed. Hence the
period between 9 a.m. and
noon, or, to speak more correctly,
a time within that period&mdash;about
11.30 a.m.&mdash;is referred
to by St. Mark as the <emph>third</emph> hour;
while a time within the same
period, but about an hour
earlier is referred to by St. John
as the sixth hour.
</p>

<p>
This view is now generally
abandoned, and not without
reason. For, in the first
place, there are no solid
grounds for believing that the
fourfold division of the Jewish
day here supposed, ever
existed. In the second place,
even if it had existed, we
should require a great deal of
proof, indeed, before we could
believe that the <q>hours</q> were
numbered in so strange and
confusing a fashion.
</p>

<p>
(2) More probable than the
preceding is the view of Cornely
(Introd., vol. iii., § 73, 3). He,
too, like Mald., holds the above
fourfold division of the day,
but says that the divisions
were called respectively, the
first, third, sixth, and ninth
hour. Now, the Synoptic
Evangelists, he says, follow
this fourfold division of the
day; and, hence, St. Mark's
third hour is the time from
9 a.m. to noon. St. John, on
the other hand, reckons according
to the more accurate
Jewish method of dividing the
day into twelve equal parts;
and, therefore, his phrase,
<q>about the sixth hour,</q> means
<emph>about noon</emph>. Cornely thinks
that the vagueness of the
phrase: <q><emph>About</emph> the sixth
hour</q> justifies us in supposing
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
that the time when Pilate
passed sentence upon our
Lord, according to St. John,
may have been as early as half-past
ten. Thus, condemned
about half-past ten, Jesus
could be led out to Calvary
and put upon the cross before
noon; in other words, while,
as St. Mark says, it was still
the third hour.
</p>

<p>
Though this view is more
probable than the preceding,
we cannot accept it. For it
supposes, like the preceding,
a division of the day into four
<q>hours,</q> for which Cornely
offers no evidence any more
than Maldonatus. Moreover,
we cannot bring ourselves to
believe that St. John would
refer to a time so early as
half-past ten as <q>about the
sixth hour.</q>
</p>

<p>
(3) Others think that while
St. Mark follows the Jewish
division of the day, and,
therefore counts the hours
from sunrise, St. John, on the
other hand, follows the Greek
method, and counts them
from midnight. Thus, about
the time of the equinox, St.
Mark's <q>third hour</q> would
mean about 9 a.m., while St.
John's <q>about the sixth hour</q>
would mean about 6 a.m.
According to this view, our
Lord was condemned about
6 a.m., and nailed to the cross
about 9 a.m.
</p>

<p>
Against this view, it is held
by many writers that St. John,
like the other Evangelists,
counts the hours of the day
from sunrise, that is to say,
according to the Jewish
method.<note place='foot'>Whether St. John numbers the hours of the day according to the Jewish
or modern method it is extremely difficult to decide from his Gospel. In
only four passages (i. 39; iv. 6; iv. 52; and xix. 14) does he refer to distinct
hours of the day, and to these passages the patrons of both opinions appeal.
In John iv. 6 we read that it was <q>about the sixth hour</q> when Jesus met the
Samaritan woman at the well, and if we are right in holding that it was then
the month of December (see above on iv. 35), this would go to show that our
Evangelist numbers according to the Jewish method. For at 6 a.m. or 6 p.m.
it would be dark, and it is wholly improbable that Jesus in the darkness would
have held conversation alone with the woman.</note>
</p>

<p>
But a still more serious
difficulty against this view
arises from the difficulty
of finding time for all the
events of the morning of the
Crucifixion between day-dawn
and 6 a.m.&mdash;the time at which,
in this opinion, our Lord was
condemned by Pilate. <q rend='pre'>Those
events ... were&mdash;(1) the
meeting of the Council; (2)
the procession to Pilate's
Court; (3) the various incidents
recorded by the four Evangelists
on the occasion of our
Lord's first appearance before
Pilate's tribunal; (4) the
sending of our Lord to Herod;
(5) the interview between our
Lord and Herod; (6) the
mocking of our Lord by
Herod's soldiers; (7) the
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
return to the Court of Pilate;
(8) the scourging; (9) the
crowning with thorns; (10)
the mocking of our Lord by
the Roman soldiers; (11) the
incident of the <q>Ecce Homo,</q>
and (12) the final interview,
within the Praetorium, between
our Lord and Pilate, at the
close of which Pilate came
forth, and, after a final effort
to obtain the liberation of our
Lord, took his place on the
judgment seat, <q>and it was
now about the sixth hour.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
(4) <q rend='pre'>It would seem, then,
that the most satisfactory
solution of the difficulty is
that given by the great
majority of modern commentators&mdash;Catholic
as well
as Protestant&mdash;namely, that an
error has crept into the text of
St. John's Gospel, and that
the true reading of the passage
in question there (xix. 14), is
to be obtained by substituting
<q>third</q> for <q>sixth.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Manifestly, such a correction
of the text removes the
difficulty we are considering.
On the one hand, it leaves
abundance of time before
Pilate's sentence&mdash;three or
four hours&mdash;for the events of
the earlier part of the morning.
On the other hand, it leaves
quite sufficient time&mdash;an interval,
it may be supposed, of
nearly an hour&mdash;between the
passing of the sentence and
the actual crucifixion; for St.
John's statement, that it was
<q>about</q> the third hour,
might surely be understood of
any time between half-past
eight and nine o'clock; and
St. Mark's words are quite
consistent with the supposition
that our Lord was crucified at
any time between nine and
ten.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And it is not to be supposed
that the emendation of
the text is suggested merely
on <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> grounds. For (1)
this reading is actually found
in one of the five Greek MSS.
of the New Testament that
rank highest in antiquity and
authority&mdash;Codex D. (<hi rend='italic'>Cantabrigiensis</hi>
or <hi rend='italic'>Bezae</hi>): this MS
dates probably from the 5th or
6th century. Moreover (2) we
have in its favour the very
strong testimony of an ancient
writer, the author of the
<hi rend='italic'>Chronicon Paschale</hi> (circ. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
630), who adopts this reading
on the authority of many
<q>accurate copies,</q> and mentions
the striking fact that
the clause was thus read in St.
John's original autograph of
his Gospel, then extant, and,
of course, deeply venerated by
the faithful in the Church at
Ephesus.</q> (See Patrizzi, <hi rend='italic'>De
Evangeliis</hi>, lib. ii., n. 195.)
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But, it may be objected, is
it not a somewhat forced
hypothesis to suppose that an
interchange of two words so
dissimilar as τρίτη and ἕκτη,&mdash;the
Greek words for <q>third</q>
and <q>sixth</q> respectively&mdash;could
have occurred by an
error of transcription? By no
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
means. For, in the first place,
it must be remembered that
the usage was almost universal
of using the numeral characters&mdash;which,
in Greek consist of
letters of the alphabet&mdash;instead
of writing the words in full.
Thus the change would consist
merely in the substitution of
one letter for another. But,
furthermore, it is essential to
explain that when the ancient
MSS. of the Greek Testament
were written, it was the usage
to employ only capital, or, as
they are called, uncial letters&mdash;thus
those MSS. themselves
are commonly known as uncial.
Now, since the character by
which the numeral 3 was
represented was <foreign rend='italic'>gamma</foreign>, the
<emph>third</emph> letter of the Greek
alphabet, its uncial form was
Γ. The character by which
the numeral 6 was represented
was the now obsolete <foreign rend='italic'>digamma</foreign>,
at one time the <emph>sixth</emph> letter of
the Greek alphabet: its uncial
form was Ϝ.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Thus then we find that the
error which, it is suggested,
has crept into this verse of the
text of St. John consisted
merely in the interchange of
the characters Ϝ and Γ&mdash;a
mistake so easily made that
its very facility constitutes a
strong antecedent probability
in favour of the view that it,
in fact, occurred.</q><note place='foot'><p>Dr. Walsh, <hi rend='italic'>Harmony of the Gospel Narratives</hi>, note 35.
</p>
<p>
We have not mentioned the view of those who hold that the error from
transcription occurred in St. Mark and not in St. John, and that we ought to
read <q>sixth</q> instead of <q>third</q> in St. Mark xv. 25. For, as Patrizzi well
points out, if St. Mark had written <q>sixth</q> in verse 25, he would not, after
describing the mocking of Christ upon the cross, say in verse 33: <q>And when
the <emph>sixth hour was come</emph> there was darkness over the whole earth until the
ninth hour.</q> If error has crept in, then, it is not in St. Mark.</p></note>
</p>

<p>
In this view, which seems to
us the most probable, Christ
was condemned <emph>about</emph> the <emph>third</emph>
hour. As the <emph>third</emph> hour at the
season of the Pasch extended
from about 8 till 9 a.m.,
St. Mark's <q>third hour</q> may
refer to a time immediately
after 8 a.m. This opinion
allows abundance of time for
the events which on that Good
Friday morning preceded the
sentence of death. For, as the
sun at the Pasch rose about
6 a.m., day-dawn began about
half-past four; and thus we
have nearly four hours from the
assembling of the Sanhedrim,
before which Jesus was led at
dawn, till the sentence was
pronounced upon Him by
Pilate. In this view, our Lord
was put upon the cross about
9 a.m.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Behold your king.</hi> This,
like Pilate's words in the next
verse, was probably said to
annoy the Jews because they
had forced him to condemn
Jesus.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>15. Illi autem clamabant:
Tolle, tolle, crucifige eum.
Dicit eis Pilatus: Regem vestrum
crucifigam? Responderunt
pontifices: Non habemus regem,
nisi Caesarem.</cell>
<cell>15. But they cried out:
Away with him, away with
him, crucify him. Pilate saith
to them: Shall I crucify your
king? The chief priests
answered: We have no king
but Cesar.</cell></row></table>

<p>
15. <hi rend='bold'>We have no king but
Caesar.</hi> Though the Jews
were at this time chafing under
the dominion of the Romans,
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
the chief priests, blinded by
their hatred of Christ, here proclaimed
their submission to the
Roman yoke.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Tunc ergo tradidit eis
ilium ut crucifigeretur. Susceperunt
autem Iesum, et eduxerunt.</cell>
<cell>16. Then therefore he delivered
him to them to be
crucified. And they took
Jesus, and led him forth.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. And now Pilate at last
delivered Jesus to them to be
crucified, having first, as St.
Matthew tells us, gone through
the vain ceremony of washing
his hands, as if he could thus
wash his soul from the guilt of
weakly consenting to Christ's
death!
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Et baiulans sibi crucem,
exivit in eum qui dicitur Calvariae
locum, hebraice autem
Golgotha:</cell>
<cell>17. And bearing his own
cross he went forth to that
place which is called Calvary,
but in Hebrew Golgotha.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17. The words <q>and led
him forth,</q> are probably not
genuine. We learn from the
Synoptic Evangelists that Jesus
was now mocked, stripped of
the purple cloak, and clothed
with His own garments. Then,
like Isaac of old (Gen. xxii. 6),
bearing the wood on which He
was to suffer, Jesus <emph>went forth</emph>
(comp. <ref target='XVIII_1'>xviii. 1</ref>) to the place
where He was crucified. By
Jewish as well as Roman law
the execution should take place
outside the city; Numb. xv.
35; 3 K. xxi. 13. And Cicero
says: Quid enim attinuit, cum
Mamertini <emph>more atque instituto
suo</emph>, crucem fixissent <emph>post
urbem</emph> in via Pompeia, &amp;c.
(Verr. v. 66). Calvary, which is
now within the walls of Jerusalem,
was then outside them,
lying to the west of the city.
A very old tradition represents
Jesus as falling three times beneath
the cross on His way to
Calvary; and the three Synoptic
Evangelists tell us that Simon
of Cyrene<note place='foot'>Cyrene was <q>the principal city of that part of Northern Africa, which
was anciently called Cyrenaica, and also (from its five chief cities) Pentapolitana.
This district was that wide projecting portion of the coast (corresponding to the
modern Tripoli) which was separated from the territory of Carthage on the one
hand, and that of Egypt on the other.</q>&mdash;Smith's <hi rend='italic'>B. D.</hi></note>, probably a Jew who
had come to Jerusalem to
celebrate the Pasch, was forced
to carry the cross. It is
disputed whether Simon was
made to bear the cross alone
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
or merely to assist Jesus. The
latter view is frequently followed
in paintings, but the former
seems more probable. Jesus
was now worn and weak, and
as the Jews were impatient to
hurry on to the place of punishment;
perhaps, too, through a
fear that He might otherwise
die on the way and deprive
them of the pleasure of seeing
Him writhing on the cross,
they would be more likely to
relieve Him from even helping
to carry the cross. <q>Nota,</q>
says A Lapide, <q>non videri
Simonem crucem gestasse cum
Christo hac ratione, ut Christus
priorem crucis partem,
Simon posteriorem portaret,
uti pingunt pictores; sed ipsum
solum totam Christi praeeuntis
crucem gestasse</q> (A Lap. on
St. Matt. xxvii. 32).
</p>

<p>
St. Luke alone mentions the
incident of the women of
Jerusalem, who followed Jesus
bewailing and lamenting for
Him (Luke xxii. 27-31). A very
ancient tradition represents the
Blessed Virgin as meeting Jesus
in this sad procession to
Calvary.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Calvaria</hi> in the Vulgate is
not a proper name. <q>It is
simply the Latin for κρανίον, a
<emph>bare skull</emph>, and used in Vulgate
only here (Matt.) and in the
parallel passages of Mark,
Luke, and John when describing
the crucifixion&mdash;nowhere
else in the Old or New Testament.
Golgotha was the Hebrew
name of the spot where our
Lord was crucified. The pure
Hebrew form of the word גלגלת
(Gulgoleth), meaning a skull
(from גלל (galal) <hi rend='italic'>to roll, to be
round</hi>), is found in Judges ix.
53. Thence came the Chaldaic
(rather we should say, Syro-Chaldaic),
Gulgalta, abbreviated
into Golgotha. But why
was the place called Golgotha,
or <emph>skull</emph>? Either because
criminals were commonly
executed on that spot, and
many skulls were found
there bleaching in the sun
(St. Jerome and most modern
Catholic comm.); or the
mound was skull-like (St. Cyril
of Jerusalem alludes to this
view, but refutes it); or (according
to tradition) the skull of
the first man, Adam, was buried
there (Orig., St. Epiph., and
nearly all the fathers) ...:
In accordance with this opinion
(of the fathers), we see so often
in paintings and pictures a
skull placed at the foot of the
cross. Although we read constantly
in sermons of the <emph>hill</emph> of
Calvary, there is little to show
that there was any hill or mound
on the spot named <hi rend='italic'>Golgotha</hi>.
St. Cyril of Jerusalem objects
to the derivation of Calvary
from the mound being skull-shaped,
because he says there
was <emph>no hill</emph> there. In the whole
history of the Passion no
mention is made of the <emph>mount</emph>
or hill of Calvary.... The
traditional spot is simply on a
high ground, like Holborn in
London, or Patrick's-hill in
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
Dublin, or the Pantheon in
Paris</q> (Dr. M'Carthy, on St.
Matthew, xxvii. 33).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Ubi crucifixerunt eum,
et cum eo alios duos hinc et
hinc, medium autem Iesum.</cell>
<cell>18. Where they crucified
him, and with him two others,
one on each side, and Jesus in
the midst.</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. Whether Jesus was nailed
to the cross while it was lying
upon the ground, or whether
the cross was first erected and
He then raised up to it by ropes
and ladders, is disputed.<note place='foot'>The following questions also are disputed:&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Whether Christ had the
crown of thorns upon Him while He hung on the cross; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) whether He
was entirely naked; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) whether four nails or three were used, that is to say,
whether His feet like His hands were nailed separately or were placed one over
the other, with one nail piercing both.</note>
</p>

<p>
As to the shape of the cross,
too, on which He was crucified,
there is a slight difference
of opinion. Setting aside the
<foreign rend='italic'>crux simplex</foreign>, which was merely
an upright stake, the <foreign rend='italic'>crux
compacta</foreign>, so called from
the parts being joined together,
was threefold: <q><foreign rend='italic'>decussata</foreign> (cut
into two equal parts), like the
letter X; <foreign rend='italic'>commissa</foreign>, like the
letter T, and <foreign rend='italic'>immissa</foreign>, or
Latin +, which differs from
the <foreign rend='italic'>commissa</foreign>, by having the
long upright beam projecting
over the transverse bar</q>
(M'Carthy). The almost
unanimous tradition of the
fathers holds that Christ died
upon the Latin cross, and
there is no reason to doubt
that this is correct.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And with him two others.</hi>
These are described as
<q>robbers</q> (λῃισταί), by St.
Matt. (xxvii. 38), and St.
Mark (xv. 27), and as <q>malefactors</q>
by St. Luke (xxiii. 32).
It may possibly have been to
add to His disgrace and shame
that the Jews had these
punished together with Jesus.
<q>And the Scripture was
fulfilled which saith: <hi rend='italic'>And
with the wicked he was reputed</hi></q>
(Mark xv. 28).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Scripsit autem et titulum
Pilatus: et posuit super crucem,
Erat autem scriptum: <hi rend='smallcaps'>Iesus
Nazarenus, rex Iudaeorum</hi>.</cell>
<cell>19. And Pilate wrote a title
also: and he put it upon the
cross. And the writing was,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Jesus of Nazareth, the King
of the Jews</hi>.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus of Nazareth, the
King of the Jews.</hi> It was
usual to indicate in some such
way the name and offence of
those crucified, and so Pilate
had an inscription placed over
the head of Jesus, giving His
name, and the reason why He
suffered. We should have
expected, however, that Pilate
would have caused to be
written: Jesus of Nazareth
who <emph>claimed to be</emph> king of the
Jews. But no, either to annoy
the Jews, or by an over-ruling
Providence, Pilate wrote:
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>King of the Jews</hi>,</q> thus
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
proclaiming Christ's royal
dignity even while he crucified
Him.
</p>

<p>
The title is slightly different
in all four Evangelists. <hi rend='italic'>Hic
est Jesus Rex Judaeorum</hi>
(Matthew); <hi rend='italic'>Rex Judaeorum</hi>
(Mark); <hi rend='italic'>Hic est Rex Judaeorum</hi>
(Luke); <hi rend='italic'>Jesus Nazarenus Rex
Judaeorum</hi> (John).
</p>

<p>
It is very probable that St.
John gives the precise words
of the title, the others the
substance. For all that is
at present legible<note place='foot'>Darras, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccles.</hi> vol. v., says that P. Drach was able to trace all
the Hebrew characters, and that they agree exactly with St. John's version of
the title.</note> of the
Hebrew text of the title agrees
exactly with St. John.
</p>

<p>
The title, written on a
whitened wooden tablet,
together with the true cross,
nails, and lance, was discovered
during the excavations ordered
by an English woman, St.
Helen, the mother of Constantine
the Great, about the
year 326 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> The title was
placed by St. Helen in the
Church of the Holy Cross
on the Esquiline, in Rome,
where it is still venerated.
See Dr. Donovan's <hi rend='italic'>Rome,
Ancient and Modern</hi>, vol. i.,
p. 508.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Hunc ergo titulum multi
Iudaeorum legerunt: quia
prope civitatem erat locus, ubi
crucifixus est Iesus: et erat
scriptum hebraice, graece, et
latine.</cell>
<cell>20. This title therefore many
of the Jews did read: because
the place where Jesus was
crucified was nigh to the city:
and it was written in Hebrew,
in Greek, and in Latin.</cell></row></table>

<p>
20. <hi rend='bold'>The place where Jesus
was crucified was nigh to
the city.</hi> Calvary was less
than a mile from the centre of
Jerusalem, and as the city
was then crowded, many read
the title. The title was in
three languages, that all
might be able to read it. The
Jews resident in Palestine
could read the Syro-Chaldaic;
the strangers could read the
Greek; and the Roman
soldiers, the Latin. It was
formerly held by some commentators
that the three inscriptions
were in Latin, but
written in Syro-Chaldaic,
Greek, and Latin characters,
respectively. This opinion,
however, has nothing to recommend
it. The obvious
sense of the verse before us,
and the relics of the title, prove
that the inscription was in
three different languages.
Many authorities reverse the
order of the two last clauses in
this verse: <q>in Latin, and in
Greek.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>21. Dicebant ergo Pilato
pontifices Iudaeorum: Noli
scribere, Rex Iudaeorum: sed
quia ipse dixit: Rex sum
Iudaeorum.</cell>
<cell>21. Then the chief priests of
the Jews said to Pilate: Write
not, the king of the Jews, but
that he said: I am the king of
the Jews.</cell></row></table>

<p>
21. <hi rend='bold'>Then the chief priests.</hi>
Rather, <q>the chief priests of
the Jews, <emph>therefore</emph>,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Respondit Pilatus:
Quod scripsi, scripsi.</cell>
<cell>22. Pilate answered: What
I have written, I have written.</cell></row></table>

<p>
22. <hi rend='bold'>What I have written,
I have written.</hi> Pilate,
already tired of the painful
business, and disgusted with
the Jews, refused to make any
change in what he had written.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Milites ergo cum crucifixissent
eum, acceperunt
vestimenta eius (et fecerunt
quatuor partes: unicuique
militi partem), et tunicam.
Erat autem tunica inconsutilis,
desuper contexta per totum.</cell>
<cell>23. The soldiers therefore
when they had crucified him,
took his garments (and they
made four parts, to every
soldier a part) and also his
coat. Now the coat was
without seam, woven from the
top throughout.</cell></row></table>

<p>
23. It was the custom to
give the clothes to the executioners.
The tunic was the
inner garment worn next the
skin, and reaching from the
neck to the ankles. It was
usually fastened round the
neck with a clasp.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Dixerunt ergo ad invicem:
Non scindamus eam, sed
sortiamur de illa cuius sit. Ut
scriptura impleretur, dicens:
Partiti sunt vestimenta mea
sibi: et in vestem meam miserunt
sortem. Et milites
quidem haec fecerunt.</cell>
<cell>24. They said then one to
another: Let us not cut it, but
let us cast lots for it whose it
shall be; that the scripture
might be fulfilled, saying:
<hi rend='italic'>They have parted my garments
among them: and upon my
vesture they have cast lots</hi>. And
the soldiers indeed did these
things.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. As Christ's tunic was
seamless, and the soldiers
thought it a pity to tear it,
they cast lots for it; God so
ordaining, in order that the
Scripture might be fulfilled.
According to an old tradition,
the tunic had been woven for
Jesus by the Blessed Virgin's
own hands.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Stabant autem iuxta crucem Iesu mater eius, et soror
matris eius, Maria Cleophae,
et Maria Magdalene.</cell>
<cell>25. Now there stood by the
cross of Jesus, his mother,
and his mother's sister, Mary
of Cleophas, and Mary
Magdalen.</cell></row></table>

<p>
25. <hi rend='bold'>By the cross.</hi> There
is no contradiction between
this and the Synoptic Evangelists
(Matt. xxvii. 55; Mark
xv. 40; Luke xxiii. 49), who
represent the women as
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
standing <q>afar off;</q> for they
refer to a time subsequent to
Christ's death, St. John to a
time when He was hanging on
the cross still alive.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>His mother's sister.</hi> Mary
of Cleophas was the wife of
Cleophas, and mother of the
Apostle James the Less. She
was a cousin of the Blessed
Virgin. Some writers, however,
prefer to think, that
she is called a <q>sister,</q>
because her husband Cleophas
was brother to St. Joseph.
</p>

<anchor id='XIX_26'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>26. Cum vidisset ergo Iesus
matrem, et discipulum stantem
quem diligebat, dicit matri
suae: Mulier, ecce filius tuus.</cell>
<cell>26. When Jesus therefore
had seen his mother and the
disciple standing, whom he
loved, he saith to his mother:
Woman, behold thy son.</cell></row>
<row><cell>27. Deinde dicit discipulo:
Ecce mater tua. Et ex illa
hora accepit eam discipulus in
sua.</cell>
<cell>27. After that, he saith to
the disciple: Behold thy
mother. And from that hour
the disciple took her to his
own.</cell></row></table>

<p>
26, 27. <hi rend='bold'>Woman</hi> (γύναι) is
the same term by which Jesus
addressed His mother at the
marriage feast of Cana (John
<ref target='II_4'>ii. 4</ref>). Its use on the present
sad, solemn occasion were
itself sufficient proof that the
term implies no disrespect.
(See above on <ref target='II_4'>ii. 4</ref>.) The virgin
disciple is here commended
to the Blessed Virgin's care,
to be loved and treated as her
son; and she, in turn, to His
care, to be loved and respected
and supported as a mother.
There is no reason for doubting
the common opinion that St.
Joseph was dead at this time;
had he been still alive, the
Blessed Virgin would, doubtless,
have remained under his
care.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>To his own</hi> (εἰς τὰ ἴδια,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> δώματα). The meaning
is that he took her to where
he himself abode. He may
have had a house of his own,
for his father seems to have
been a man of some means
(Mark i. 20), and the expression
would most naturally
refer to his own house (Acts
xxi. 6). But it is possible, too,
that he merely lodged in
another's house. In <ref target='XVI_32'>xvi. 32</ref>,
it is predicted that the Apostles
should be scattered every man
to his own (εἰς τὰ ἴδια),
and very few of these poor
Galilean fishermen can have
owned houses in Jerusalem.
</p>

<p>
Regarding the common
belief that St. John, at the foot
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
of the cross, represented the
whole human race, or, at least,
all the faithful, it must be said
that the fathers make no
mention of this view, and that
there is nothing in the obvious
literal sense of the passage to
indicate that St. John held any
such representative capacity.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>28. Postea sciens Iesus quia
omnia consummata sunt, ut
consummaretur scriptura, dixit:
Sitio.</cell>
<cell>28. Afterwards Jesus knowing
that all things were now
accomplished, that the scripture
might be fulfilled, said: I
thirst.</cell></row></table>

<p>
28. <hi rend='bold'>Afterwards</hi>, when three
o'clock was come, Jesus,
knowing that He had done all
for which He had been sent,
and that the prophecies regarding
the Messias had been
fulfilled in Himself, in order
that one remaining prophecy
might be accomplished, said:
<hi rend='bold'>I thirst</hi>. Sorrow, and
suffering, and the loss of blood
had exhausted the humours of
the body, and naturally produced
thirst.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>29. Vas ergo erat positum
aceto plenum. Illi autem spongiam
plenam aceto, hyssopo
circumponentes, obtulerunt ori
eius.</cell>
<cell>29. Now there was a vessel
set there full of vinegar. And
they putting a sponge full of
vinegar about hyssop, put it to
his mouth.</cell></row></table>

<p>
29. <hi rend='bold'>Now there was a vessel
set there full of vinegar.</hi>
Some think that the <q>vinegar</q>
was the posca, or thin wine,
which was the ordinary drink
of the Roman soldiers, and
that it was there on this
occasion for their use. But
the fact that the sponge and
hyssop seem to have been
at hand, provided apparently
for the sake of the victims,
makes it very probable that
the vinegar also was provided
on their account. We must
carefully distinguish this
occasion from another referred
to by SS. Matt. and Mark,
prior to the crucifixion (Matt.
xxvii. 34; Mark xv. 23).
These Evangelists refer to the
present occasion also, but they
speak of only one who took
the sponge, and gave Christ to
drink (Matthew xxvii. 48;
Mark xv. 36). We may
reconcile St. John's account
with theirs, by saying that he
simply uses the indefinite
plural for the singular; or
that he ascribes to many what
was done by one with their
approval. One of those
present, then, probably a
soldier, took a sponge,<note place='foot'>The sponge is still preserved in Rome, in St. John Lateran's.</note> and
soaked it in vinegar, and
fastened it around the point of
a sprig of hyssop, and then
reached it up to our Lord's
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
mouth that He might suck it.
Thus was the Scripture accomplished:
<q>And in My
thirst they gave Me vinegar to
drink</q> (Ps. lxviii. 22). Many
think that the vinegar was
given to hasten death.
</p>

<p>
Hyssop is an aromatic plant,
which grows upon walls. Its
stalks are less than two feet
long, so that our Lord's
mouth seems not to have been
raised higher above the ground
than such a stalk in a man's
outstretched arm could reach.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>30. Cum ergo accepisset
Iesus acetum, dixit: Consummatum
est. Et inclinato capite
tradidit spirituum.</cell>
<cell>30. Jesus therefore when he
had taken the vinegar, said:
It is consummated. And
bowing his head, he gave up
the ghost.</cell></row></table>

<p>
30. <hi rend='bold'>It is consummated</hi>;
that is, all the purpose of My
life is completed; only one
thing remains, that I finish
My course and crown My life
and sufferings by My death.
Then, as St. Luke tells us:
<q>Jesus crying with a loud
voice, said: Father into thy
hands I commend my spirit.
And saying this he gave up
the ghost</q> (Luke xxiii. 46).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>He gave up the ghost.</hi>
He gave up His soul into the
hands of His eternal Father.
The expression used seems to
be employed with the special
purpose of showing that His
death itself was a voluntary
act (comp. x. <ref target='X_17'>17</ref>, <ref target='X_18'>18</ref>). <q>Spiritum
cum verbo sponte dimisit,
praevento carnificis officio.</q>
(Tertull. Apol., ch. 21, p. 58.)
And St. Augustine on this verse
says beautifully: <q>Quis ita
dormit quando voluerit, sicut
Jesus mortuus est quando
voluit? Quis ita vestem ponit
quando voluerit, sicut se
carne exuit quando vult?
Quis ita cum voluerit abit,
quomodo ille cum voluit
obiit? Quanta speranda vel
timenda potestas est judicantis,
si apparuit tanta morientis?</q>
</p>

<p>
It may be useful to set down
here together what are
commonly referred to as the
seven last <q>words</q> of Jesus
on the cross. The Synoptic
Evangelists record four of
them, and St. John the other
three. The first was: <q>Father
forgive them, for they know
not what they do</q> (Luke xxiii.
34); the second, addressed to
the good thief: <q>Amen, I
say to thee, this day thou shalt
be with me in paradise</q> (Luke
xxiii. 43); the third: <q>Woman
behold thy son,</q> together
with the words addressed to
St. John: <q>Behold thy
mother</q> (John xix. 26, 27);
the fourth: <q>My God, my
God, why hast thou forsaken
me?</q> (Matthew xxvii. 46;
Mark xv. 34); the fifth: <q>I
thirst</q> (John xix. 28); the
sixth: <q>It is consummated</q>
(John xix. 30); and the seventh:
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
<q>Father into thy hands I commend
my spirit</q> (Luke xxiii.
46).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>31. Iudaei ergo (quoniam
parasceve erat), ut non remanerent
in cruce corpora sabbato
(erat enim magnus dies ille
sabbati), rogaverunt Pilatum
ut frangerentur eorum crura, et
tollerentur.</cell>
<cell>31. Then the Jews (because
it was the parasceve) that the
bodies might not remain upon
the cross on the sabbath-day
(for that was a great sabbath-day)
besought Pilate that their
legs might be broken, and
that they might be taken away.</cell></row></table>

<p>
31. <hi rend='bold'>(Because it was the
parasceve) that the bodies</hi>,
&amp;c. We would take away the
brackets. The fact that it was
Friday, and that the Sabbath
was, therefore, near, made the
Jews anxious to have the bodies
removed. This verse strongly
confirms the view we hold (see
above on verse 14) that St. John
means by parasceve, the day
before the Sabbath, that is to
say, Friday; not the day before
the Paschal feast. For, in the
present verse the fact that it
was the parasceve is evidently
taken to imply that the next day
would be the Sabbath.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>For that was a great sabbath
day.</hi> The better-supported
Greek reading would
be rendered: For great was the
day of that sabbath (ἐκεινου τοῦ
σαββάτου). The meaning is
that this Sabbath was specially
solemn, because it was the Sabbath
that fell within the Paschal
week.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And that they might be
taken away.</hi> We read in Deut.
xxi. 22, 23: <q>When a man
hath committed a crime for
which he is punished with
death, and being condemned to
die is hanged on a gibbet, his
body shall not remain upon the
tree, but shall be buried <emph>the
same day</emph>.</q> It was more than
usually necessary to have the
bodies buried on the same day
in the present case, as the next
day was to be a Sabbath, and a
very special Sabbath, too. And
as the Sabbath began at sunset,
hence the anxiety of the Jews
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
to have the bodies removed.
The breaking of the legs was
intended to insure death. With
the Romans it was usual to let
the bodies of the crucified hang
till they rotted.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>32. Venerunt ergo milites:
et primi quidem fregerunt
crura, et alterius, qui crucifixus
est cum eo.</cell>
<cell>32. The soldiers therefore
came: and they broke the
legs of the first, and of the
other that was crucified with
him.</cell></row>
<row><cell>33. Ad Iesum autem cum
venissent, ut viderunt eum iam
mortuum, non fregerunt eius
crura:</cell>
<cell>33. But after they were
come to Jesus, when they saw
that he was already dead, they
did not break his legs.</cell></row>
<row><cell>34. Sed unus militum lancea
latus eius aperuit, et continuo
exivit sanguis et aqua.</cell>
<cell>34. But one of the soldiers
with a spear opened his side,
and immediately there came
out blood and water.</cell></row></table>

<p>
34. <hi rend='bold'>Opened</hi> (Vulg., aperuit)
<hi rend='bold'>his side</hi>. It is very much more
probable that the verb in the
original is ἔνυξεν (pierced) not
ἤνοιξεν (opened). <hi rend='bold'>A spear</hi>;
(λόνχη). This was the long
lance of a horseman. The lance
is now preserved and venerated
in Rome, in St. Peter's. It
wants the point, which is kept
in the holy chapel in Paris.
</p>

<p>
It is uncertain whether it was
Christ's right side or left that
was pierced with a lance. According
to the Ethiopian Version,
and the apocryphal
Gospels of Nicodemus and the
Infancy, it was the right. Thus
a very early tradition points to
the right side, and it was on his
right side, too, that St. Francis
was marked when he received
the sacred stigmata.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And immediately there
came out blood and water.</hi>
It is disputed whether this flow
of blood and water was natural
or miraculous.
</p>

<p>
(1) Some hold that each flow
was miraculous, because in a
<emph>dead</emph> body blood does not flow
and water is not found in the
region of the heart.
</p>

<p>
(2) Others, on the contrary,
hold that in each case the flow
was quite natural, because in
a dead body the <emph>clot</emph> or red
corpuscles become separated
from the <emph>serum</emph> or watery substance
of the blood, and both
would naturally flow out when
Christ's side was pierced. This
opinion, however, is improbable,
as the best modern physiologists
say it would require
four hours after death to effect
this separation,<note place='foot'>Longet, <hi rend='italic'>Physiologie</hi>, t. ii., p. 701.</note> and no such
length of time can be admitted
between the death of Christ at
three o'clock and the piercing
of his side, for he had to be
buried before sunset, that is
to say, at the latest, about
6 p.m.
</p>

<p>
(3) Hence others hold that
Christ's heart had broken, and
that the blood which had therefore
flowed into the pericardium,
or sheath of the heart, had
become, when extravasated,
<emph>rapidly</emph> dissolved into its constituent
elements. This view
is held by some writers of
great authority. See Dr.
Stroud's <hi rend='italic'>Treatise on the
Physical Cause of the Death
of Christ</hi>. Against it, however,
we have the opinion
of physiologists, that the heart
never breaks except in those in
whom the organism has been
long diseased; and it is contrary
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
to the common opinion
that Christ took or had a diseased
body, or any diseased
organ.
</p>

<p>
(4) Hence, with Corluy, we
think the most probable view
is, that the blood flowed
naturally from a body <emph>only a
short time dead</emph>, the water
miraculously. Certainly the
fathers generally seem to see
in this flow of blood and water
a mystery, something that was
not ordinary or natural, and
many think that our Evangelist
himself, in the next verse, <emph>insists</emph>
upon the truth of what he says,
as if it were something wholly
unnatural and difficult to believe.
It may, however, be
replied to this latter argument
that he insists upon the truth
of the facts, not because anything
miraculous and difficult
to believe had taken place, but
because there was question of
the fulfilment of two important
Messianic prophecies.
</p>

<p>
According to the fathers, the
flow of blood typified the Sacrament
of the Blessed Eucharist,
that of water, the Sacrament of
Baptism. Thus St. Cyril of
Alex.: <q>Lancea latus ejus perfodiunt,
unde cruor aqua mistus
scaturiit, quod Eulogiae
mysticae et baptismatis imago
quaedam erat atque primitiae.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>35. Et qui vidit, testimonium
perhibuit: et verum est testimonium
eius. Et ille scit quia
vera dicit: ut et vos credatis.</cell>
<cell>35. And he that saw it hath
given testimony: and his
testimony is true. And he
knoweth that he saith true;
that you also may believe.</cell></row></table>

<p>
35. <hi rend='bold'>And he that saw</hi> (hath
seen) <hi rend='bold'>it hath given testimony</hi>.
<q>It</q> is not represented
in the original, and
ought not to stand in our
English version, as it seems to
determine the reference to be
merely to the sight of the flow
of blood and water. We take
the object of the verb <q>hath
seen,</q> to be <emph>all</emph> that is stated in
the two preceding verses;
namely, that Christ's legs were
not broken, that His side was
pierced, and that blood and
water flowed. That this is the
meaning is proved by the next
verse.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>That you also may believe.</hi>
The sense is not that you also
may believe that blood and
water flowed, or that Christ
really died; but, with Beel.;
Bisp., Corl., that you also, as
well as I, may more firmly believe
that Jesus is the Messias
foretold by the prophets. These
words, then, express the full
purpose that our Evangelist
had in view in testifying to the
facts just stated. ἵνα (that)
may be taken to depend upon
the three preceding clauses, or
upon the words immediately
preceding: <q>saith true.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>36. Facta sunt enim haec, ut
scriptura impleretur: Os non
comminuetis ex eo.</cell>
<cell>36. For these things were
done that the scripture might
be fulfilled: <hi rend='italic'>You shall not
break a bone of him</hi>.</cell></row></table>

<p>
36. <hi rend='bold'>For these things were
done.</hi> <q>For</q> establishes the
connection, and proves, we
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
think, the view we hold. It is
as if the Evangelist said: these
things happened, and I insist
upon their truth, because they
afford a strong argument why
you should believe that Jesus
was the Messias.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>You shall not break a bone
of him</hi>, had reference in its
literal sense (Exod. vii. 46;
Num. ix. 12) to the Paschal
lamb; yet, St. John tells us
here that the prophecy was fulfilled
in Christ. Hence we have
here an invincible argument
for the existence of a mystical
sense in Scripture.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>37. Et iterum alia scriptura
dicit: Videbunt in quem transfixerunt.</cell>
<cell>37. And again another
scripture saith: <hi rend='italic'>They shall
look on him whom they pierced</hi>.</cell></row></table>

<p>
37. The quotation is from
Zach. xii. 10, according to the
Hebrew text, except that, perhaps,
the correct reading in
Zach. is <q>on me,</q> and not <q>on
him.</q> The passage in Zach.
is Messianic in its literal
sense, and the context shows
that there is question of looking
upon Jesus in sorrow and
regret for what had taken place.
We know from St. Luke that
<q>all the multitude returned
(from Calvary) striking their
breasts</q> (xxiii. 48).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>38. Post haec autem rogavit
Pilatum Ioseph ab Arimathaea
(eo quod esset discipulus Iesu,
occultus autem propter metum
Iudaeorum), ut tolleret corpus
Iesu. Et permisit Pilatus.
Venit ergo, et tulit corpus Iesu.</cell>
<cell>38. After these things
Joseph of Arimathea (because
he was a disciple of Jesus, but
secretly for fear of the Jews)
besought Pilate that he might
take away the body of Jesus.
And Pilate gave leave. He
came therefore and took away
the body of Jesus.</cell></row></table>

<p>
38. <hi rend='bold'>After these things.</hi> We
learn from SS. Matthew and
Mark that when Joseph approached
Pilate it was evening
(Matthew xxvii. 57; Mark xv.
42). Joseph was <q>a rich man</q>
(Matthew xxvii. 57), <q>a noble
counsellor</q> (Mark xv. 43),
that is a member of the Sanhedrim,
<q>a good and a just man</q>
(Luke xxiii. 50).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Arimathea.</hi> Opinion is
divided as to whether this was
Rama in the tribe of Benjamin
(Matt. ii. 18), or Rama (Ramathaimsophim)
in the tribe of
Ephraim (1 Kings i. 1). The
latter, the birthplace of the Prophet
Samuel, is called Ramatha
in 1 Kings i. 19. St. Luke calls
Arimathea <q>a city of Judea</q>
(Luke xxiii. 51). St. Jerome
(Onom. sacr., 2nd Ed., p. 178)
identifies Arimathea with
Remftis, now Rantieh, on the
plain North of Lydda. See
Smith's <hi rend='italic'>B. D.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>sub voc.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Secretly.</hi> Till now he had
been a disciple in secret, but
after the death of Christ both
he and Nicodemus boldly appeared
in public as devoted
friends of their dead Master.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And Pilate gave leave.</hi>
Permission was usually given
to the friends of one who had
been executed to bury his
body. Sometimes, indeed,
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
Roman Governors granted
such permission only on receiving
money from the friends
(Cic., Verr. v. 45), but in the
present instance Pilate granted
the privilege gratis (<q><emph>Donavit</emph>
corpus Jesu,</q> Mark xv. 45).
</p>

<p>
We learn from St. Mark
that Pilate gave the body only
after he had summoned the
centurion and learned that
Jesus was dead (Mark xv.
44, 45).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>He came therefore and
took away the body of Jesus.</hi>
We learn from St. Mark (xv.
46), and St. Luke (xxiii. 53),
that he <q>took down</q> the
body of Jesus, either aiding in
or directing the work. Hence
he must have returned to the
foot of the cross, before the
orders given to the soldiers
(verses 31, 32) were fully carried
out. If we suppose Joseph to
have come soon after the
Jews (verse 31) to Pilate, the
governor, before granting his
request, would naturally wish
to be certain that Jesus was
dead, and would therefore
summon the centurion and
make inquiry (Mark xv. 44,
45); then Joseph, returning
from wherever Pilate was at
the time, arrived before the
body of our Lord had been
taken down by the soldiers.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>39. Venit autem et Nicodemus,
qui venerat ad Iesum
nocte primum, ferens mixturam
myrrhae et aloës, quasi libras
centum.</cell>
<cell>39. And Nicodemus also
came, he who at first came to
Jesus by night, bringing a
mixture of myrrh and aloes,
about an hundred pound
<hi rend='italic'>weight</hi>.</cell></row></table>

<p>
39. <hi rend='bold'>He who at first came
to Jesus by night.</hi> The
reference is to the visit recorded
above in <ref target='III_1'>iii. 1</ref>, ff. St.
John alone makes mention of
Nicodemus on this occasion.
The phrase <q>at first</q> may
imply that Nicodemus visited
Christ on other occasions, or
it may indicate merely the
beginning of Christ's ministry.
The present public act of
reverence in the light of day,
beside a crowded city, is
thrown into relief by contrast
with the timid visit then paid
<q>by night.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Bringing a mixture of
myrrh and aloes, about an
hundred pound weight.</hi>
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
<q>The compound was made of
the gum of the myrrh tree, and
a powder of the fragrant aloe
wood. The amount of the
preparation (<q>about a hundred
pound weight,</q> that is, a
hundred Roman pounds of
nearly twelve ounces) has
caused some needless difficulty.
The intention of Nicodemus
was, without doubt, to cover
the body completely with the
mass of aromatics. Comp. 2,
Chro. (Paralip.) xvi. 14: for
this purpose the quantity was
not excessive as a costly gift
of devotion.</q> (Westc. in <hi rend='italic'>The
Speaker's Commentary</hi>.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>40. Acceperunt ergo corpus
Iesu, et ligaverunt illud linteis
cum aromatibus, sicut mos est
Iudaeis sepelire.</cell>
<cell>40. They took therefore the
body of Jesus, and bound it in
linen cloths with the spices, as
the manner of the Jews is to bury.</cell></row></table>

<p>
40. <hi rend='bold'>And bound it in linen
cloths</hi> (ὁθόνια). They bound
the body in swathes of linen
cloth covered with layers of
the aromatic mixture. The
Synoptists speak only of <q>a
linen cloth</q> (σινδών) in which
the body was <q>wrapped.</q>
We may naturally suppose
that the body when embalmed
was wrapped in a large linen
cloth.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>A new sepulchre, wherein
no man yet had been laid.</hi>
We learn from St. Matthew
(xxvii. 60), that the sepulchre
belonged to Joseph, and from
all the Synoptists that it was
hewn out of a rock, and therefore
artificial. As no other
body had been buried in the
sepulchre, there could be no
possible doubt that the body
that rose was that of our Lord.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>41. Erat autem, in loco ubi
crucifixus est, hortus, et in
horto monumentum novum, in
quo nondum quisquam positus
erat.</cell>
<cell>41. Now there was in the
place, where he was crucified,
a garden; and in the garden
a new sepulchre, wherein no
man yet had been laid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>42. Ibi ergo propter parasceven
Iudaeorum, quia iuxta
erat monumentum, posuerunt
Iesum.</cell>
<cell>42. There therefore because
of the parasceve of the Jews
they laid Jesus, because the
sepulchre was nigh at hand.</cell></row></table>

<p>
42. <hi rend='bold'>Because the sepulchre
was nigh at hand.</hi> It seems
to be implied that if there had
been more time, some other
sepulchre would have been
chosen. As it was, because
the Sabbath was at hand they
laid Him in the tomb that was
most convenient. St. John
writing for the Christians of
Asia Minor, speaks of <q>the
parasceve of the Jews,</q>
because when he wrote,
Saturday was the Parasceve of
Christians, the day of rest
having been already changed
from Saturday to Sunday, in
honour of our Blessed Lord's
resurrection. (See Acts xx. 7;
1 Cor. xvi. 2.)
</p>

</div>

<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XX.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-10. <hi rend='bold'>On Easter Sunday morning Magdalen comes to the tomb, and
then runs to Peter and John, who also come to the tomb.</hi>
</p>

<p>
11-17. <hi rend='bold'>Magdalen, having followed Peter and John back to the tomb,
sees first two angels, and then Jesus Himself.</hi>
</p>

<p>
18. <hi rend='bold'>Then she announces to the disciples that Jesus had appeared
to her.</hi>
</p>

<p>
19-23. <hi rend='bold'>Appearance of Jesus to the disciples on Easter Sunday evening
when he instituted the Sacrament of Penance.</hi>
</p>

<p>
24, 25. <hi rend='bold'>Incredulity of Thomas.</hi>
</p>

<p>
26-29. <hi rend='bold'>Appearance of Jesus again on Low Sunday to Thomas and the
other disciples, when Thomas believes, and confesses his faith.</hi>
</p>

<p>
30, 31. <hi rend='bold'>Incompleteness of this narrative regarding the miracles which
Christ wrought to prove his resurrection, and statement of the
object which St. John had in view in recording what he has
recorded.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
St. John's narrative regarding
the visit of Magdalen to
the tomb on Easter Sunday
morning is very simple, when
taken by itself. She came to
the tomb or, at least, started
for it, <q>when it was yet dark,</q>
and then ran from the tomb to
tell Peter and John that the
body of Jesus had been removed
(xx. 1, 2). But when
we compare this account with
those of the other Evangelists
several serious difficulties arise.
Thus, while St. John says that
Magdalen <q>cometh early,
<emph>when it was yet dark</emph>, unto the
sepulchre;</q> St. Matthew says
that she and the other Mary
came to see the sepulchre <q>in
the <emph>end of the Sabbath</emph> (according
to the Vulgate:
<q><emph>Vespere</emph> Sabbati</q>), when it
began to dawn towards the
first day of the week</q> (Matt.
xxviii. 1). And St. Mark
creates still further difficulty
when he says: <q>And when
the Sabbath was past, Mary
Magdalen, and Mary (the
mother) of James, and Salome
bought (not brought; Vulg.
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
emerunt) sweet spices, that
coming they might anoint
Jesus. And very early in the
morning, the first day of the
week, they come to the sepulchre,
<emph>the sun being now risen</emph></q>
(Mark xvi. 1-2). Thus, while
St. Matt. represents Magdalen
as coming to the sepulchre in
the end of the Sabbath, or as
the still more difficult text of
the Vulgate has it: <q>Vespere
Sabbati,</q> St. Mark represents
her as coming on Sunday
morning, <emph>when the sun was
risen</emph>; and St. John, as coming
on the Sunday morning
<emph>when it was yet dark</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Again, while St. John does
not mention the appearance of
any angel on the occasion of
Magdalen's first visit to the
tomb (John xx. 1), St. Mark
says that when the women
entered the tomb <q>they saw a
young man <emph>sitting</emph> on the right
side clothed with a white robe</q>
(Mark xvi. 5); and St. Luke,
that after the women entered
the tomb, and found not the
body of the Lord <q>behold <emph>two</emph>
men <emph>stood</emph> by them in shining
apparel</q> (Luke xxiv. 4).<note place='foot'>St. Matt. on this point need create no difficulty, for although he says
that an angel rolled back the stone from the mouth of the sepulchre and sat
upon it (probably <emph>outside</emph> the sepulchre), yet he does not say that the women
were addressed by the angel while he sat upon the stone, nor even that he was
seen by them while he was in that position. That he was seen by the guards,
one of whom may have been afterwards converted and have told this incident,
is plain from St. Matt.: but we are free to suppose that when the angel
addressed the women (Matt. xxviii. 5), he may have been already within the
sepulchre, as in St. Mark.</note>
</p>

<p>
Various theories have been
advanced to reconcile these different
accounts. Maldonatus
(on Matt. xxviii. 3) undertakes,
with his usual great ability, but,
we think, without success, to
reconcile them in the hypothesis,
not merely that there was
only one company of women,
but also that Mary Magdalen
visited the tomb but once on
the morning of the resurrection.
Others, while admitting that
Magdalen came twice to
the tomb that morning, as,
indeed, seems to follow naturally
from St. John's account
(xx. 2-11), hold that there was
only one company of women,
and that all the Evangelists
speak of the same company.
Others again hold that not only
did Magdalen come twice to
the tomb, but that at least two
different companies of women
visited the tomb that morning,
and that some Evangelists
refer to the visit of one company,
others to the visit of the
other company. Thus Patrizzi
(<hi rend='italic'>De Evang.</hi>, Diss. liii. 5, 6,
7) supposes SS. Matt. and
Mark to refer to the visit of
one company, SS. Luke and
John to the visit of a different
company. On the other hand
Dr. Walsh (<hi rend='italic'>Harmony of the
Gosp. Narr.</hi>), Cornely (Introd.
III., <hi rend='italic'>Synops. Chron.</hi>, p. 301),
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
and Greswell (<hi rend='italic'>Harm. of the
Gosp.</hi>), suppose St. Luke to
refer to the visit of one company,
the other three Evangelists
to that of a different company.
</p>

<p>
The following seems to us
the most satisfactory method
of reconciling all the accounts.
Very early on Sunday morning,
<q>when it was yet dark</q>
(John xx. 1), Mary Magdalen,
accompanied, perhaps from
the start, by Mary of Cleophas,
set out from Bethany, where
we suppose her to have spent
the preceding day and night
in the house of her brother
Lazarus. To this same departure
from Bethany and to
the same two women (compare
Matt. xxviii. 1 with xxvii. 56)
St. Matt. refers: <q>And in
the end of the Sabbath, when it
began to dawn towards the first
day of the week, came Mary
Magdalen and the other Mary
to see the sepulchre</q> (Matt.
xxviii. 1).<note place='foot'>The difficulty against this view, from the fact that St. Matt., according
to the Vulgate Version, represents these women as coming to the tomb on the
<emph>evening</emph> of the Sabbath (Vespere sabbati), disappears, if we admit that the
Vulgate rendering of the Greek phrase, ὀψὲ δὲ σαββάτων is incorrect, or, at
least, misleading, and should rather be post sabbatum, as the phrase is
explained by Mald., Cornely (iii. p. 301, note S), Kuin., Bloomf., and the
majority of commentators. Certainly we are convinced that Magdalen did
not visit the tomb on Saturday evening; for had she done so, she must
have learned that the tomb was guarded and the stone that closed it sealed,
and she and her companions would not come as they did on Sunday morning,
saying to one another: <q>Who shall roll away the stone for us?</q> Had she
been at the tomb on Saturday evening, she could not have hoped to be allowed
to roll away the stone, which was sealed and guarded; or, if she hoped for this
permission from the soldiers, then there would have been no room for the
difficulty as to who should roll away the stone, as the soldiers, if they permitted
its removal, might be counted upon to remove it for women.</note> Proceeding on their
way they were joined by
Salome and probably by others,
and arrived at the tomb, <q>the
sun being now risen</q> (Mark
xvi. 2). The journey from
Bethany was nearly three miles,
for Bethany was nearly two
miles east of Jerusalem (John
xi. 18), and Calvary was another
mile westward from the
eastern part of the city. We
may well suppose, then, that an
hour and a half&mdash;the length of
morning twilight at Jerusalem
about the season of the Pasch
(Patriz. Diss. liii. 2)&mdash;was
spent on the journey, especially
if, as we may suppose, there
were delays on the way while
the party was being joined by
other women; and hence,
though the start from Bethany
took place while it was still
dark (John xx. 1), they did not
arrive at the tomb till the sun
had risen (Mark xvi. 2).
</p>

<p>
While these women were on
their way, Christ rose and
quitted the sealed tomb, and
after His resurrection an angel
rolled away the stone and sat
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
upon it, <emph>in the sight of the
guards</emph> (Matt. xxviii. 2-4).
The women on arriving saw
the stone already rolled away
(Mark xvi. 4; John xx. 1), and
Magdalen probably ran and
looked into the tomb. Not
seeing the body of Jesus, she
concluded it had been removed,
and ran to say so to the disciples
(John xx. 2).
</p>

<p>
Her companions remained at
the tomb and entered it, and
the angel mentioned by St.
Matt. (xxviii. 5) and St. Mark
(xvi. 5) appeared to them.
The women then left the tomb
in fear and astonishment and
great joy, and ran to tell the
disciples, but through fear
told no one <emph>on the way</emph> (Mark
xvi. 8), though their hearts
were full of the wonderful and
joyous event.
</p>

<p>
Soon after their departure
from the tomb, Peter and John
arrived coming to see if what
Magdalen announced was true.
Then Peter and John departed,
and Magdalen who had followed
them to the tomb, remained
behind them, and saw
the two angels <emph>sitting</emph> (John xx.
12). Then Jesus appeared to
her (John xx. 14-17), before he
had appeared to anyone else,
as we learn from St. Mark:
<q>But He rising early the first
day of the week appeared first
to Mary Magdalen out of whom
he had cast seven devils</q>
(xvi. 9).<note place='foot'>It is the common belief that Jesus appeared first of all to the Blessed
Virgin, though the appearance to Magdalen is the first mentioned in the
Gospels. Estius and some other great commentators, however, deny that He
appeared to the Blessed Virgin, and hold that as he appeared in order to confirm
the faith of those to whom he appeared, there was no need that He should
appear to the Blessed Virgin.</note> Meantime the women,
Magdalen's companions,
were on their way to the disciples,
and now Jesus appeared
to them (Matt. xxviii. 9), immediately
after He had appeared
to Magdalen.
</p>

<p>
And now we have reconciled
the accounts of SS. Matthew,
Mark, and John regarding
Magdalen and her companions.
It remains to speak of St. Luke's
account.
</p>

<p>
We believe that St. Luke
speaks of a different company
of women from that referred
to by the other Evangelists.
There is nothing
improbable in supposing that
more than one company of
women came to the tomb on
Sunday morning. As they had
not been able to visit it on the
Sabbath, a visit of several
companies on Sunday morning
is just what might be expected.
But we are not obliged to
depend merely on <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> reasoning.
For St. Luke's company
prepared their spices on
Friday evening before the Sabbath:
<q>and returning they prepared
spices and ointments:
and on the Sabbath-day they
rested according to the commandment</q>
(Luke xxiii. 56);
the other company, after the
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
Sabbath, when the first day of
the Jewish week had begun:
<q>and when the Sabbath was
past, Mary Magdalen and Mary
<emph>the mother</emph> of James and Salome
bought sweet spices, that coming
they might anoint Jesus.</q>
(Mark xvi. 1). Moreover, the
women of whom St. Luke
speaks seem to have come to
the tomb earlier than any
other company, for they came
ὄρθρου βαθέος (literally, at the
first dawn, Luke xxiv. 1): and
we are not to conclude that
they merely set out for the
tomb at this early hour, for they
seem to have arrived at the
tomb before the sun was risen:
see Luke xxiv. 22: ὄρθριαι ἐπὶ
τό μνημεῖον.
</p>

<p>
Again, the natural inference
from Luke xxiv. 9-12, 22-24 is
that the women he mentions
had returned from the tomb
and announced Christ's resurrection
before Peter and John
went to the tomb. We are
disposed to hold with Patrizzi
(Lib. iii., Diss. liii. 4) that St.
Luke xxiv. 10 is a summary
account of <emph>all</emph> the announcements
made by the various
women to the different followers
of Christ that morning; and
hence all the women there referred
to need not be supposed
to have gone to the disciples
before Peter and John went to
the tomb. But we think that
Luke xxiv. 22-24, compared
with Luke xxiv. 12, proves that
others besides Magdalen had
come to the disciples from the
tomb before Peter and John
went thither. <q>Yea, and certain
women also of our company
affrighted us, who before
it was light (ὄρθριαι) were at
the sepulchre. And not finding
his body, came, saying that
they had also seen a vision of
angels, who say that he is
alive. And some of our people
went to the sepulchre: and
found it so as the women had
said, but him they found not</q>
(Luke xxiv. 22-24).
</p>

<p>
Hence we hold that St. Luke's
company of women started for
the tomb at early dawn, after
Magdalen had set out from
Bethany, but as they probably
spent the night in Jerusalem,
they <emph>arrived before</emph> her, saw the
two angels <emph>standing</emph> (Luke xxiv.
4), and then went to announce
Christ's resurrection to the
disciples. Not long after the
departure of this company,
Magdalen and her companions
arrived at the tomb, and Magdalen
<emph>running</emph> from the tomb
(John xx. 2) arrived at the
house where Peter and John
were staying, about the same
time as St. Luke's company,
or perhaps a little later. Her
announcement that the Lord's
body had been removed, confirming
to some extent the
announcement of St. Luke's
company that He had risen,
Peter and John now ran to the
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
tomb. The events that followed
have been already arranged
above.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Una autem sabbati, Maria
Magdalene venit mane, cum
adhuc tenebrae essent, ad monumentum; et vidit lapidem
sublatum a monumento.</cell>
<cell>1. And on the first day of the
week, Mary Magdalen cometh
early, when it was yet dark
unto the sepulchre: and she
saw the stone taken away from
the sepulchre.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. <hi rend='bold'>The first day of the week.</hi>
The Vulgate reading <q>una</q>
(μιᾶ) is a Hebraism for
<foreign rend='italic'>prima</foreign>; and the week is called
by the name of its principal
day, the Sabbath. Comp.
Luke xviii. 22.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And when it was yet dark.</hi>
She started from Bethany while
it was yet dark, but she did
not arrive at Calvary till the sun
was risen (Mark xvi. 2).
</p>

<anchor id='XX_2'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. Cucurrit ergo, et venit ad
Simonem Petrum, et ad alium
discipulum quem amabat Iesus,
et dicit illis: Tulerunt Dominum
de monumento, et nescimus
ubi posuerunt eum.</cell>
<cell>2. She ran therefore, and
cometh to Simon Peter, and to
the other disciple whom Jesus
loved, and saith to them:
They have taken away the
Lord out of the sepulchre, and
we know not where they have
laid him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. It is likely that before
running to tell the Apostles
that the body was removed,
Magdalen had looked into the
sepulchre and convinced herself
it was not there.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And cometh to Simon Peter.</hi>
Notwithstanding his fall on
the preceding Thursday night,
which can hardly have remained
till now unknown to Magdalen,
Peter was still regarded as the
leader of the disciples.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>The other disciple whom
Jesus loved</hi>, is our Evangelist.
He and Peter may have been
staying in different places
in the city. Our Blessed Lady
was staying in the same house
as St. John (xix. 27).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>They have taken away the
Lord.</hi> It is plain that the
angels had not yet appeared to
Magdalen and told her that
Jesus was risen. Yet Maldonatus
supposes she had already
seen the angels, and
learned that Jesus was risen,
as recorded below in verses
11, 12, ff.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>We know not.</hi> These words
show that Magdalen had not
come alone to the tomb.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Exiit ergo Petrus, et ille
alius discipulus, et venerunt ad
monumentum.</cell>
<cell>3. Peter therefore went out,
and that other disciple, and
they came to the sepulchre.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. <hi rend='bold'>And they came to the
sepulchre.</hi> The meaning is
that they <q>went towards</q>
(ἤρχοντο εἰς) the sepulchre.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Currebant autem duo
simul, et ille alius discipulus
praecucurrit citius Petro, et
venit primus ad monumentum.</cell>
<cell>4. And they both ran
together, and that other
disciple did outrun Peter, and
came first to the sepulchre.</cell></row></table>

<p>
4. We have here the vivid
touches of one of the two
actors in the scene. The
incidents of that eventful
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
morning must have remained
for ever fresh in his memory.
St. John being the younger
man was able to run more
quickly than Peter.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. Et cum se inclinasset,
vidit posita linteamina, non
tamen introivit.</cell>
<cell>5. And when he stooped
down, he saw the linen cloths
lying: but yet he went not in.</cell></row></table>

<p>
5. It would appear from
this, as indeed we might expect,
that it was necessary to
stoop in order to look into the
sepulchre. See also verse 11
and Luke xxiv. 12.
</p>

<p>
Having stooped and looked
in, St. John saw (seeth) the
linen swathes in which the
body of our Saviour had been
bound (xix. 40).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Venit ergo Simon Petrus
sequens eum, et introivit in
monumentum, et vidit linteamina
posita.</cell>
<cell>6. Then cometh Simon
Peter, following him, and went
into the sepulchre, and saw
the linen cloths lying.</cell></row></table>

<p>
6. St. John had arrived first
at the tomb, but (deterred by
some feeling of fear or awe) he
did not enter, as he takes care
to record. Then Peter arrived
less fleet but more brave, and,
apparently, without pausing to
look in, at once enters the
tomb.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And saw (seeth).</hi> In the
original we have here the verb
θεωρέι, denoting an intent and
searching gaze, as distinct
from St. John's simple look
(βλέπει) described in the preceding
verse.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Et sudarium quod fuerat
super caput eius, non cum linteaminibus
positum, sed separatim
involutum in unum locum.</cell>
<cell>7. And the napkin that had
been about his head, not lying
with the linen cloths, but
apart, wrapt up into one place.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. <hi rend='bold'>And the napkin.</hi> St.
Peter's more searching examination
discovered what had
been unnoticed by St. John.
The presence of the linen
swathes, and the napkin folded
and laid apart, are doubtless
mentioned as proof that Christ
was truly risen. Had His body
been simply taken away to
some other tomb, those taking
it, whether friends or enemies,
would not have gone to the
useless trouble of removing
the spice-covered bandages and
the napkin. And, certainly, if
it had been hurriedly stolen,
such nice care would not have
been taken to fold the napkin
and place it apart. So, substantially,
St. Chrysostom on
this verse.
</p>

<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>8. Tunc ergo introivit et ille
discipulus qui venerat primus
ad monumentum, et vidit, et
credidit:</cell>
<cell>8. Then that other disciple
also went in, who came first
to the sepulchre: and he saw
and believed.</cell></row></table>

<p>
8. St. John now followed
Peter into the cave.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And he saw and believed.</hi>
St. Augustine understands this
to mean that John believed
what Magdalen had said (verse
2), namely that the body of
Jesus had been removed. We
prefer to understand that he
believed what St. Luke's
company of women had told
him, namely, that Jesus was
risen from the dead; for when
our Evangelist speaks of belief
<emph>absolutely</emph>, as here, he usually
means faith.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>9. Nondum enim sciebant
scripturam, quia oportebat eum
a mortuis resurgere.</cell>
<cell>9. For as yet they knew not
the scripture, that he must
rise again from the dead.</cell></row></table>

<p>
9. <hi rend='bold'>For as yet.</hi> We take
the meaning to be, that as yet
<emph>until now</emph> they knew not the
Scripture, that it was necessary
Jesus should rise from the
dead. Even now St. Peter
<q>went away, wondering in
himself at that which was
come to pass</q> (Luke xxiv. 12).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>10. Abierunt ergo iterum discipuli
ad semetipsos.</cell>
<cell>10. The disciples therefore
departed again to their home.</cell></row></table>

<p>
10. <hi rend='bold'>The disciples therefore</hi>&mdash;thinking
that they could
learn nothing more there&mdash;<hi rend='bold'>departed
again to their home</hi>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. Maria autem stabat ad
monumentum foris, plorans.
Dum ergo fleret, inclinavit se,
et prospexit in monumentum:</cell>
<cell>11. But Mary stood at the
sepulchre without, weeping.
Now as she was weeping, she
stooped down, and looked into
the sepulchre.</cell></row></table>

<p>
11. <hi rend='bold'>But Mary stood at the
sepulchre without, weeping.</hi>
Maldonatus holds that what is
here recorded took place when
Magdalen came to the tomb
(verse 1), but that St. John
hastening to tell of the coming
of St. Peter and himself to the
tomb, inverts the order of
events in his narrative. But
this is unnatural. We take it
that Magdalen had followed
Peter and John back to the
tomb, and now remained
behind them. <q>A stronger
affection,</q> says St. Augustine,
<q>riveted to the spot one of a
weaker nature.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Et vidit duos angelos in
albis, sedentes, unum ad caput,
et unum ad pedes, ubi positum
fuerat corpus Iesu.</cell>
<cell>12. And she saw two angels
in white, sitting, one at the
head, and one at the feet,
where the body of Jesus
had been laid.</cell></row></table>

<p>
12. <hi rend='bold'>And she saw two
angels.</hi> The vision of angels
now accorded to Magdalen is
not mentioned by any other
Evangelist.
</p>

<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>13. Dicunt ei illi: Mulier,
quid ploras? Dicit eis: Quia
tulerunt Dominum meum: et
nescio ubi posuerunt eum.</cell>
<cell>13. They say to her:
Woman, why weepest thou?
She saith to them: Because
they have taken away my
Lord: and I know not where
they have laid him.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. Magdalen's words here
are the same as in verse 2,
except that <q>my Lord</q> is
substituted for <q>The Lord,</q>
and <q>I know not</q> for <q>we
know not.</q> Both her statement
and her loss are now
more personal.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Haec cum dixisset, conversa
est retrorsum, et vidit
Iesum stantem: et non sciebat
quia Iesus est.</cell>
<cell>14. When she had thus said,
she turned herself back, and
saw Jesus standing; and she
knew not that it was Jesus.</cell></row></table>

<p>
14. <hi rend='bold'>She turned herself
back.</hi> Magdalen, conscious,
perhaps, of another presence,
or moved by the ecstatic gaze
of the angels on Jesus, now
turned round and saw Him,
but did not recognise Him.
Probably, as happened to the
two disciples on the way to
Emmaus (Luke xxiv. 16), her
eyes were held that she should
not know Him.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>15. Dicit ei Iesus: Mulier,
quid ploras? quem quaeris?
Illa existimans quia hortulanus
esset, dicit ei: Domine, si tu
sustulisti eum, dicito mihi ubi
posuisti eum: et ego eum
tollam.</cell>
<cell>15. Jesus saith to her:
Woman, why weepest thou?
Whom seekest thou? She
thinking that it was the
gardener, saith to him: Sir,
if thou hast taken him hence,
tell me where thou hast laid
him: and I will take him
away.</cell></row></table>

<p>
15. <hi rend='bold'>The gardener</hi>; that is,
the man who had charge of
Joseph's garden, in which our
Lord was buried. The man's
presence in the garden at that
hour of the morning&mdash;about 7
o'clock&mdash;naturally suggested
the thought. Without answering
his question, Magdalen
replies: <hi rend='bold'>Sir, if thou hast taken
him hence.</hi>... As if she
imagined everyone to be filled
like herself with only one
thought, she does not say who
it is she is seeking.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And I will take him away.</hi>
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
To her love everything
seemed possible, nor does she
pause to think whether she
could carry the body, nor
whither she would bear it.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Dicit ei Iesus: Maria.
Conversa illa, dicit ei: Rabboni
(quod dicitur magister).</cell>
<cell>16. Jesus saith to her:
Mary. She turning, saith to
him: Rabboni (which is to
say, Master).</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. Our Lord now calls her
by her name, and she at once
recognises Him.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>She, turning, saith to him</hi>
(very many authorities add <q>in
Hebrew</q>) <hi rend='bold'>Rabboni</hi>. The word
strictly means <q>my Master,</q>
but the pronominal suffix, just
as in Rabbi, gradually became
almost a part of the title. The
Hebrew spoken by Magdalen
was of course Syrochaldaic
The corresponding word in
pure Hebrew would be Rabban
(רבן).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Dicit ei Iesus: Noli me
tangere, nondum enim ascendi
ad Patrem meum, vade autem
ad fratres meos, et dic eis:
Ascendo ad Patrem meum, et
Patrem vestrum, Deum meum,
et Deum vestrum.</cell>
<cell>17. Jesus saith to her: Do
not touch me, for I am not
yet ascended to my Father:
but go to my brethren, and say
to them: I ascend to my
Father and to your Father, to
my God and your God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17. Probably Magdalen had
prostrated herself at His feet,
and was clinging to them, as
did other women that morning
(Matt. xxviii. 9). Christ's
words are variously explained.
The following view seems to be
the most natural: Do not seek
to cling to Me, to remain with
Me now (ἅπτεσθαι is often used
not in the sense of touching,
but of clinging to, hanging on
by. See Lidd. and Scott); you
shall have other opportunities
of satisfying your love, since I
am to remain with you for
forty days, and am not at once
ascending to My Father.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>But go to My brethren and
say to them.</hi> For her consolation
she is made the harbinger
of Christ's further exaltation.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>To My Father and to your
Father.</hi> <q>Non ait Patrem
nostrum, sed <emph>Patrem meum
et Patrem vestrum</emph>. Aliter ergo
meum, aliter vestrum: natura
meum, gratia vestrum. Neque
dixit Deum nostrum, sed <emph>Deum
meum</emph>, sub quo ego homo; et
Deum vestrum, inter quos et
ipsum mediator sum</q> (St. Aug.
on St. John Tr. 121.)
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Venit Maria Magdalene
annuntians discipulis: Quia
vidi Dominum, et haec dixit
mihi.</cell>
<cell>18. Mary Magdalen cometh
and telleth the disciples: I
have seen the Lord, and these
things he said to me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. Magdalen went and
announced to the disciples that
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
she had seen the Lord; but,
as St. Mark, xvi. 11, tells us,
they did not believe her.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Cum ergo sero esset die
illo, uno sabbatorum, et fores
essen clausae, ubi erant discipuli
congregati propter metum
Iudaeorum: venit Iesus,
et stetit in medio, et dixit eis:
Pax vobis.</cell>
<cell>19. Now when it was late
that same day, the first of the
week, and the doors were
shut, where the disciples were
gathered together for fear of
the Jews, Jesus came and stood
in the midst, and said to them:
Peace be to you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. <hi rend='bold'>Now when it was late
that same day.</hi> Jesus now
appears to the ten Apostles
on Easter Sunday evening.
Before this, and after the
appearance to Magdalen, He
had appeared to the women
returning from the tomb
(Matthew xxviii. 9); then to
Peter (Luke xxiv. 34); then,
towards evening, to the two
disciples on the way to
Emmaus (Luke xxiv. 13, 31);
so that the apparition to the
apostles on Easter Sunday
evening was the <emph>fifth</emph> apparition
of Jesus on that day, mentioned
in the Gospels. He passed
through the closed doors in
virtue of the property of subtility
which His glorified body
possessed, and saluted the
Apostles <q>and those who were
with them</q> (Luke xxiv. 33-36)
with the usual Jewish salutation.
</p>

<p>
From a comparison of St.
Luke (xxiv. 33-36), we know
that the disciples who had
returned from Emmaus were
present when our Lord appeared
on the occasion here
mentioned by St. John. Now,
Emmaus was sixty stadia
(about seven English miles)
from Jerusalem (Luke xxiv.
13), and the two disciples did
not reach Emmaus till it was
<q>towards evening,</q> and the day
was <q>far spent</q> (Luke xxiv.
29). Hence though they
tarried only a short time in
Emmaus (Luke xxiv. 33), they
can hardly have returned much
before dark. Indeed it may
have been after dark, and in
that case the words <q>when it
was late that same day</q> would
prove that our Evangelist
speaks here, not according to
the Jewish method of counting
the day from evening to
evening, but according to the
Greek method of counting, as
we do, from midnight to
midnight.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Et cum hoc dixisset,
ostendit eis manus et latus.
Gavisi sunt ergo discipuli, viso
Domino.</cell>
<cell>20. And when he had said
this, he shewed them his
hands, and his side. The
disciples therefore were glad,
when they saw the Lord.</cell></row></table>

<p>
20. Then to convince them
that it was not a spirit they
saw (see Luke xxiv. 37), He
showed them (the wounds in)
His hands, and feet (Luke
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
xxiv. 39), and side, and said
to them, as St. Luke tells us:
<q>Handle and see, for a spirit
hath not flesh and bones as
you see me to have</q> (Luke
xxiv. 39). From these words
it is plain that Christ's glorified
body, though it had passed
through the closed doors, was
yet capable of being touched
and handled.<note place='foot'><q>Unde secundum naturam suam palpabile est corpus gloriosum, sed ex
virtute supernaturali hoc ei competit ut cum vult non palpetur a corpore non
glorioso.</q>&mdash;St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summ. Theol.</hi>, Suppl., q. 83, art. 6.</note> When He had
partaken of food in presence
of the disciples (Luke xxiv. 42,
43), and dispelled all their
doubts as to the reality of His
body, then, as St. John tells us
here, they were glad.
</p>

<anchor id='XX_21'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>21. Dixit ergo eis iterum:
Pax vobis. Sicut misit me
Pater, et ego mitto vos.</cell>
<cell>21. He said therefore to
them again: Peace be to you.
As the Father hath sent me,
I also send you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
21. When fear had been
dispelled and doubt overcome,
He saluted them again with
the usual salutation, and proceeded
to confer upon them
the power of forgiving sins.
<hi rend='bold'>As the Father hath sent me</hi>,
with Divine authority for the
salvation of mankind, so with
the same authority and for the
same purpose, I, who have
equal authority with the
Father, send you.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Haec cum dixisset, insufflavit:
et dixit eis: Accipite
Spiritum sanctum:</cell>
<cell>22. When he had said this,
he breathed on them; and he
said to them: Receive ye the
Holy Ghost:</cell></row></table>

<p>
22. <hi rend='bold'>He breathed on them.</hi>
He breathed upon the Apostles
(probably with one breath
upon all) to signify what His
words expressed, that He was
giving them the Holy Ghost.
Already, indeed, the Holy
Ghost was in their souls, but
He was now given to them
more fully in His grace, and in
the new power which they
received of forgiving sins.
This power of forgiving sins is
common to the three Divine
Persons, but is here attributed
to the Holy Ghost, like all
other things pertaining to our
sanctification. Though the
Apostles already had the Holy
Ghost in their souls and though
He was given to them more fully
now, yet He was still to be
given in a <emph>visible</emph> and fuller
manner on the day of Pentecost.
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
It is important to note
that the power of forgiving
sins here evidently attributed
to the Holy Ghost proves Him
to be God, for only God, who
is offended by sin, can give
authority and power to forgive
it.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Quorum remiseritis peccata,
remittuntur eis: et quorum
retinueritis, retenta sunt.</cell>
<cell>23. Whose sins you shall
forgive, they are forgiven
them: and whose <hi rend='italic'>sins</hi> you
shall retain, they are retained.</cell></row></table>

<p>
23. The Council of Trent has
defined that there is question
here of the remission of sins in
the Sacrament of Penance.<note place='foot'><q>Si quis dixerit verba illa Domini Salvatoris: Accipite Spiritum
Sanctum; quorum remiseritis peccata, remittuntur eis; et quorum
retinueritis, retenta sunt: non esse intelligenda de potestate remittendi et
retinendi peccata in Sacramento Poenitentiae, Sicut Ecclesia Catholica ab
initio semper intellexit; detorserit autem, contra institutionem hujus Sacramenti,
ad auctoritatem praedicandi evangelium, anathema sit.</q>&mdash;Sess. xiv.,
Can. 2, <hi rend='italic'>De Poen.</hi></note>
As the Council points out, the
Church always understood the
words in this sense, and the
natural meaning of the words
signifies that the sins are to
be remitted or retained by a
<emph>judicial sentence</emph> of the persons
here addressed. For the words
are: <hi rend='italic'>If you remit</hi> the sins of
some (Greek, ἄν τινων), that is
if you <emph>decide</emph> to remit the sins
of some, and to retain the sins
of others, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Since there is question of a
judicial sentence, and since
judgment can be passed only
upon subjects, it follows that
there can be question here only
of sins committed <emph>after</emph> Baptism.
</p>

<p>
Upon the words of this text
note&mdash;(1) That the persons to
whom this wondrous power
is given are to <emph>forgive</emph> (remiseritis)
sins, not merely to
<emph>declare</emph> them forgiven by God.
</p>

<p>
(2) That there is no
restriction as to the sins that
may be forgiven; so that there
is no such thing as an irremissible
sin, if only the minister
can decide that the penitent is
worthy to receive the Sacrament,
and the penitent have
the proper dispositions. (3)
That instead of the present
tense (remittuntur eis) which
stands in the first member<note place='foot'>This reading, however, is not certain, some critics read the perfect
ἀφεώνται (remissa sunt). So Tisch., Treg., Westc. &amp; Hort., and Lachm.</note>, we
have the perfect (retenta sunt)
in the second member, implying
that the sins <emph>remain</emph> as
they were. (4) That in the
second member the words are
not: Whose sins you shall not
forgive, but whose sins you
shall <emph>retain</emph>; implying, in the
minister, a <emph>positive</emph> judgment
adverse to the penitent. For
other questions arising out of
this text, consult works on
Dogmatic Theology.
</p>

<p>
It appears from St. Luke,
xxiv. 33, that there were other
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
persons than the Apostles
present, when these words were
spoken and this power to forgive
sins conferred. It may be
that Christ made it clear that
this power was given only to
the Apostles and their successors,
the bishops and priests of
the Catholic Church; but, at
all events, the tradition of the
Catholic Church, with which
the Holy Ghost remains to teach
her all truth (John <ref target='XVI_13'>xvi. 13</ref>), has
decided that the power was
given only to these.
</p>

<p>
Whether the power of forgiving
sins was on this occasion
given to Thomas, who was
absent, is disputed. Some, as
Mald., hold that it was, and
appeal to the case mentioned in
Numb. xi. 26, when the spirit
of prophecy was given to Eldad
and Medad, though they were
absent. Others, as Toletus,
and A Lap., hold that it was
not, as Thomas was now incredulous,
but that it was given
on the following Sunday, when
Jesus appeared to Thomas and
converted him.
</p>

<anchor id='XX_24'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Thomas autem unus ex
duodecim, qui dicitur Didymus,
non erat cum eis quando venit
Iesus.</cell>
<cell>24. Now Thomas, one of
the twelve, who is called
Didymus, was not with them
when Jesus came.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24. <hi rend='bold'>Thomas.</hi> See above on
xi. 16. <hi rend='bold'>One of the twelve</hi> <q>He
says one of the twelve, although
the Apostolic College was <emph>now</emph>
reduced to <emph>eleven</emph>, because
<q>twelve</q> was the original number,
just as in the case of the
<q>Decemvirs,</q> they would be
thus termed, although only <emph>nine</emph>
out of the <emph>ten</emph> were present on
a particular occasion</q> (M'Ev.).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>25. Dixerunt ergo ei alii discipuli:
Vidimus Dominum.
Ille autem dixit eis: Nisi videro
in manibus eius fixuram
clavorum, et mittam digitum
meum in locum clavorum, et
mittam manum meum in latus
eius, non credam.</cell>
<cell>25. The other disciples
therefore said to him: We
have seen the Lord. But he
said to them: Except I shall
see in his hands the print of
the nails, and put my finger
into the place of the nails, and
put my my hand into his side,
I will not believe.</cell></row></table>

<p>
25. The reply of Thomas
shows how he had dwelt on each
terrible detail of the Passion.
The other Apostles may have
told him how Christ had pointed
to His hands and feet, and
invited them to <q>handle and
see</q> that it was He Himself.
(Luke xxiv. 29, 30). If so, the
language of Thomas would
naturally be shaped in accordance
with what they told him.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>26. Et post dies octo, iterum
erant discipuli eius intus: et
Thomas cum eis. Venit Iesus,
ianuis clausis, et stetit in medio,
et dixit: Pax vobis.</cell>
<cell>26. And after eight days,
again his disciples were within,
and Thomas with them. Jesus
cometh, the doors being shut,
and stood in the midst, and
said: Peace be to you.</cell></row></table>

<p>
26. <hi rend='bold'>And after eight days</hi>,
that is to say, on Low Sunday,
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
Christ again appeared to the
Apostles, Thomas being
present; and this was His <emph>sixth</emph>
appearance. Thomas, though
still without faith, had remained
in the company of the
Apostles.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>27. Deinde dicit Thomae:
Infer digitum tuum huc, et
vide manus meas, et affer
manum tuam, et mitte in latus
meum: et noli esse incredulus,
sed fidelis.</cell>
<cell>27. Then he said to Thomas:
put in thy finger hither, and
see my hands, and bring
hither thy hand and put it into
my side; and be not faithless,
but believing.</cell></row></table>

<p>
27. We may here admire our
Lord's tender and touching
mercy in condescending to
such pains to dispel the unbelief
of Thomas. The
language used is such as to
prove to the Apostle that Jesus
knew the very words in which
he had questioned the resurrection.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>28. Respondit Thomas, et
dixit ei: Dominus meus et
Deus meus.</cell>
<cell>28. Thomas answered, and
said to him: My Lord, and
my God.</cell></row></table>

<p>
28. <hi rend='bold'>My Lord, and my God</hi>
(ὁ κύρίος μου καὶ ὁ θεός μου).
As often in the New Testament
(Mark ix. 25; Luke viii.
54; John viii. 10), the nominative
is here used for the vocative
(see Beel., <hi rend='italic'>Gr. Gram.</hi>, § 29,
Adnot. 1). For the Evangelist
expressly states that
Thomas addressed Christ. It
is absurd then to contend, as
the Socinians and Paul of
Heidelberg did, that these
words are simply an exclamation,
meaning: O Jehovah!
For, besides the fact that Christ
is addressed, the Jews were
not in the habit of using any
such exclamation. The second
council of Constant., cap. 12,
condemned those who, following
the teaching of Theodore of
Mopsuestia, said: <q>Haec verba
a Thoma non dicta fuisse de
Christo, sed miraculo resurrectionis
perculsum, Thomam
laudasse Deum qui Christum
resuscitasset.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thomas's words, then, are a
confession of faith, as our
Lord's words in the next verse
prove, and of faith in Christ's
humanity and Divinity.
</p>

<p>
In confessing Jesus to be his
Lord, Thomas acknowledges
Him to be <q>the master</q> who had
been crucified; while, in the remaining
words, he clearly confesses
Christ's Divinity. And
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
so our Evangelist, ever mindful
of his object in writing this
Gospel, records this splendid
testimony to the humanity and
Divinity of Jesus Christ, and
our Lord's approval thereof.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>29. Dixit ei Iesus: Quia
vidisti me Thoma, credidisti:
beati qui non viderunt et crediderunt.</cell>
<cell>29. Jesus saith to him:
Because thou hast seen me,
Thomas, thou hast believed:
blessed are they that have not
seen, and have believed.</cell></row></table>

<p>
29. <hi rend='bold'>Because thou hast
seen Me, Thomas thou hast
believed.</hi> <q>Aliud vidit, et
aliud credidit. Vidit hominem
et cicatrices, et ex hoc credidit
divinitatem resurgentis</q> (St.
Thomas Aquin).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Blessed are they that have
not seen, and have believed.</hi>
Rather: <q>Blessed are they
that <emph>saw not</emph> (ἱδόντες), and
believed.</q>
</p>

<p>
The aorist seems to point
to something that had already
taken place during the
preceding week. Some had
believed who had merely heard
from the Apostles or the pious
women that Jesus was risen,
and their faith was more
prompt and praiseworthy than
that of Thomas.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>30. Multa quidem et alia
signa fecit Iesus in conspectu
discipulorum suorum, quae non
sunt scripta in libro hoc.</cell>
<cell>30. Many other signs also
did Jesus in the sight of his
disciples, which are not written
in this book.</cell></row></table>

<p>
30. <hi rend='bold'>Many other signs.</hi> We
understand not of the various
other miracles of Christ's mortal
and risen life, but of the
other <emph>proofs</emph> (σημεῖα, literally
signs) of His resurrection and
Divinity, which he afforded
during His risen life. For, the
miracles of His mortal life were
wrought in the sight of all the
people; but the <emph>proofs</emph> of His
resurrection were given only
<q>in the sight of His disciples.</q>
So Mald., Tol., Corn., &amp;c.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>31. Haec autem scripta sunt
ut credatis quia Iesus est
Christus Filius Dei: et ut credentes,
vitam habeatis in nomine
eius.</cell>
<cell>31. But these are written
that you may believe that
Jesus is the Christ the Son of
God; and that believing you
may have life in his name.</cell></row></table>

<p>
31. But what is here written
<emph>in evidence of His resurrection</emph>
is written in order that you
may believe that Jesus is the
Messias (ὁ Χριστός), the Son
of God; and that believing you
may have life, the life of grace
here, and of glory hereafter,
through His name; that is,
through faith in Him.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXI.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1-14. <hi rend='bold'>Appearance of Jesus to the disciples at the Sea of Galilee; the
miraculous draught of fish, after which St. John first recognises
Jesus, and St. Peter leaps from the boat into the water to come
to Him. The breakfast miraculously prepared for the disciples
by Jesus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
15-17. <hi rend='bold'>Peter's triple confession of his love for his master; he is
constituted by Jesus visible head of the whole Church.</hi>
</p>

<p>
18-19. <hi rend='bold'>Jesus predicts the manner of Peter's death, as St. John explains.</hi>
</p>

<p>
20-23. <hi rend='bold'>He reproves Peter's curiosity regarding the end in store for
St. John.</hi>
</p>

<p>
24-25. <hi rend='bold'>The conclusion.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The authenticity of this last
chapter of our Gospel has
been questioned (see <ref target='Intro_V'>Introd. v</ref>.),
and it has been contended
that the chapter was not written
by St. John, but by some disciple
or disciples of his after
his death. Even among those
who admit its authenticity,
some have held that it was not
written at the same time as the
rest of the Gospel, but at a
later period, and added on as
an appendix.<note place='foot'>Some, who admit the authenticity of verses 1-23, deny that of verses 24
and 25.</note> Both those who
deny the authenticity of the
chapter, and those who hold it
to be an authentic <hi rend='italic'>appendix,
written at a later date</hi>, argue
from the last two verses of
chapter xx., which, they say,
prove that St. John intended to
conclude at that point. In
addition to this, those who
deny the authenticity, contend
that the style of this chapter is
so different from that of the rest
of the Gospel as to compel
the belief that both cannot
possibly be the work of the
same hand.
</p>

<p>
We may begin by remarking
that no Catholic is free to doubt
the <emph>inspiration</emph> of the chapter,
so that whoever wrote it must
<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
have been inspired. This follows
from the decree of Trent,
which defined the <emph>entire books</emph>
of the Vulgate with all their
<emph>parts</emph> (and this is certainly a
part, not merely a <q>particula</q>
of this Gospel) to be canonical
Scripture. See above on iv. <ref target='IV_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='IV_4'>4</ref>.
</p>

<p>
Hence, the only questions
remaining are: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) whether
St. John or <emph>some other inspired
writer</emph> wrote the chapter; and
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) in case St. John wrote it,
whether he wrote it at the same
time as the rest of the Gospel,
or later, and as an appendix.
</p>

<p>
With Catholic commentators
generally, we hold that the
chapter was written by St. John
and at the same time as the
rest of the Gospel. For, since
it is read in all the MSS., and
quoted by all the fathers, the
natural inference is that it stood
in the Gospel from the beginning.
Against this unanimous
testimony of tradition, the
arguments for any other view
have no weight. For, as to the
argument drawn from the last
two verses of chapter xx., we
have already, with Mald., Tol.,
and Cornely, given the most
probable explanation of those
verses, from which it appears
that they were not intended as
a conclusion of the whole Gospel,
but only of that portion of
it which deals with the proofs
of His Divinity afforded by
Christ to the Apostles during
His risen life.<note place='foot'>The miraculous draught of fish in chapter xxi. was not intended to
confirm the faith of the disciples, which now needed no confirmation, but to
typify the fecundity of the Church over which Peter was about to be placed.</note>
</p>

<p>
As to the argument from the
difference of style, we confidently
deny that any such difference
exists. Kuinoel, no
mean judge on such a point,
and certainly not a prejudiced
witness, says: <q>Omnino probari
nequit, scribendi genus,
in hoc capite, si clausulam<note place='foot'>By <q>clausulam</q> he means the last two verses of the chapter.</note>
ejus exceperis, diversum esse
a scribendi genere, quod in
reliquo Evangelio deprehenditur.</q>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>1. Postea manifestavit se
iterum Iesus discipulis ad mare
Tiberiadis. Manifestavit autem
sic:</cell>
<cell>1. After this Jesus shewed
himself again to the disciples
at the sea of Tiberias. And
he shewed <hi rend='italic'>himself</hi> after this
manner.</cell></row></table>

<p>
1. <hi rend='bold'>After this.</hi> How many
days after Low Sunday (xx.
26) the events now to be recorded
occurred, we cannot
determine. In the meantime,
at all events, the disciples had
left Jerusalem and gone to
Galilee (Mat. xxviii. 16), in
obedience to the express desire
of their Divine Master
(Mat. xxviii. 7; Mark xvi. 7).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>The sea of Tiberias.</hi> See
above on <ref target='VI_1'>vi. i</ref>.
</p>

<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>

<anchor id='XXI_2'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>2. Erant simul Simon Petrus,
et Thomas, qui dicitur Didymus,
et Nathanael, qui erat a
Cana Galilaeae, et filii Zebedaei,
et alii ex discipulis eius
duo.</cell>
<cell>2. There were together
Simon Peter, and Thomas
who is called Didymus, and
Nathanael who was of Cana in
Galilee, and the sons of
Zebedee, and two others of
his disciples.</cell></row></table>

<p>
2. <hi rend='bold'>Nathanael</hi> is most probably
the same with Bartholomew,
the Apostle. See above
on <ref target='I_45'>i. 45</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And two others of his
disciples.</hi> Who they were we
cannot tell. Had <q>the sons
of Zebedee</q> not been already
named, it would be quite in the
style of our Evangelist to refer
to his brother James and himself
in this way.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>3. Dicit eis Simon Petrus:
Vado piscari, Dicunt ei: Venimus
et nos tecum. Et exierunt,
et ascenderunt in navim: et
illa nocte nihil prendiderunt.</cell>
<cell>3. Simon Peter saith to
them: I go a fishing. They
say to him: We also come
with thee. And they went
forth and entered into the ship,
and that night they caught
nothing.</cell></row></table>

<p>
3. As they had not yet begun
to preach the Gospel, and
thus to have a right to support
from the faithful, they had to
provide themselves with the
necessaries of life, and so they
<q>go a fishing.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And they went forth</hi> from
the house where they were,
<hi rend='bold'>and entered into the ship</hi>
(τὸ πλοῖον), which was there,
lent or hired for their use;
<hi rend='bold'>and that night they caught
nothing</hi>, God having so arranged,
no doubt, in order to
make the miracle of the following
morning more remarkable.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>4. Mane autem facto stetit
Iesus in littore: non tamen
cognoverunt discipuli quia
Iesus est.</cell>
<cell>4. But when the morning
was come, Jesus stood on the
shore: yet the disciples knew
not that it was Jesus.</cell></row></table>

<p>
4. <hi rend='bold'>But when the morning
was come.</hi> The better supported
Greek reading (γινομένης
not γενομένης) gives the
meaning: <q>When the morning
was breaking.</q> But even
if this be the correct reading,
and the morning was only
breaking, still this fact by itself
may not be the whole
reason why the disciples failed
to recognise Jesus. Even when
they had come close to him
(verse 12), they knew it was
He, rather because of what had
happened than from the testimony
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
of their eyes. Comp.
Luke xxiv. 16.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>5. Dixit ergo eis Iesus:
Pueri numquid pulmentarium
habetis? Responderunt ei:
Non.</cell>
<cell>5. Jesus therefore said to
them: Children, have you any
meat? They answered him:
No.</cell></row></table>

<p>
5. Jesus called to them from
the shore: <q>Have you any
meat?</q> The Revised Version
renders: <q>Have you aught to
eat?</q> The Hellenistic Greek
word (προσφάγιον), which is
here used, meant primarily
something that was eaten as
relish with other food, but it
came to mean food generally,
and so the meaning here probably
is: <q>have you anything
to eat?</q> See Lidd. and Scott,
<hi rend='italic'>sub voce</hi>.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>6. Dicit eis: mittite in dexteram
navigii rete: et invenietis.
Miserunt ergo: et iam non
valebant illud trahere prae
multitudine piscium.</cell>
<cell>6. He saith to them: Cast
the net on the right side of the
ship; and you shall find.
They cast therefore: and now
they were not able to draw it
for the multitude of fishes.</cell></row></table>

<p>
6. <hi rend='bold'>On the right side of the
ship.</hi> Jesus directed them to
the particular spot (which
John, who was present, is
careful to record), in order
that they might not look upon
the draught as a mere accident.
Why they so readily obeyed
one unknown to them, we
cannot say with certainty.
Perhaps the minds of some
of them reverted to another
occasion, in many respects
similar to this (Luke v. 4-10),
when, after a night of fruitless
toil, their Master, then with
them in His mortal flesh,
blessed their labours with a
miraculous draught of fish in
the morning. And though
they did not now <emph>know</emph> it
was He that spoke to them,
yet we cannot help thinking,
especially when we remember
how they were now
come to Galilee in expectation
of His appearance to them,
that some of them must have
<emph>suspected</emph> that perhaps it was
He who now called to them
from the shore.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>To draw it</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, into the
boat. In verse 11 we are told
that they <q>drew</q> it to land.
It will be noticed that a
different word is used in verse
8 of dragging the net after
the boat.
</p>

<anchor id='XXI_7'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>7. Dixit ergo discipulus ille
quem diligebat Iesus, Petro:
Dominus est. Simon Petrus
cum audisset quia Dominus
est, tunica succinxit se (erat
enim nudus) et misit se in mare.</cell>
<cell>7. That disciple therefore
whom Jesus loved, said to
Peter: It is the Lord. Simon
Peter, when he heard that it
was the Lord, girt his coat
about him (for he was naked)
and cast himself into the sea.</cell></row></table>

<p>
7. The beloved disciple
infers from the miraculous
draught that it is the Lord
who stands upon the shore.
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
<hi rend='bold'>Simon Peter</hi> (add <q>therefore,</q>
οὖν) <hi rend='bold'>when he heard that it
was the Lord, girt his coat
about him (for he was naked)</hi>.
The virgin disciple was the
first to recognise his master,
but Peter as usual was the
leader in action. The <q>coat</q>
was some garment usually
<emph>worn over another</emph> (ἐπενδύτην),
perhaps an outer and looser
tunic, which Peter had laid
aside while fishing. As he
was about to swim to his
Master, and foresaw that his
garments should necessarily
be wet, he probably thought it
decorous to have some other
garment on him besides the
tight-fitting inner tunic. We
suppose therefore that he was
already clothed in the inner
tunic. He girded himself in
order that the garment might
not impede him when swimming.
The Greek word, which,
in our Version, is rendered
<q>naked,</q> is used not only of
those who are entirely naked,
but also of those who are
sparingly clad. See Matt. xxv.
36; Acts xix. 16; 1 Kings
xix. 24.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>8. Alii autem discipuli navigio
venerunt (non enim longe erant
a terra, sed quasi cubitis ducentis),
trahentes rete piscium.</cell>
<cell>8. But the other disciples
came in the ship (for they
were not far from the land,
but as it were two hundred
cubits) dragging the net with
fishes.</cell></row></table>

<p>
8. <hi rend='bold'>In the ship.</hi> Rather:
<q>in the boat</q> (τῷ πλοιαρίω).
It may be that the reference
is to a small boat that was
attached to the larger vessel
(τὸ πλοῖον) mentioned in
verse 3. As the cubit was
eighteen inches, the distance of
the boat from the shore was
100 yards.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>9. Ut ergo descenderunt in
terram, viderunt prunas positas,
et piscem superpositum,
et panem.</cell>
<cell>9. As soon then as they
came to land, they saw hot
coals lying, and a fish laid
thereon, and bread.</cell></row></table>

<p>
9. <hi rend='bold'>They saw hot coals
lying.</hi> In the circumstances,
the natural view is that the
fire, as well as the fish and
bread, was provided miraculously.
Doubtless one of
Christ's objects in preparing
this repast was to prove to
His disciples that He could
and would provide for the
temporal as well as the
spiritual necessities of His
followers.
</p>

<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>10. Dicit eis Iesus: Afferte
de piscibus, quos prendidistis
nunc.</cell>
<cell>10. Jesus saith to them:
Bring hither of the fishes
which you have now caught.</cell></row></table>

<p>
10. There are various views
as to why He said this. Some
say because He wished them
to cook some of the fish, as
what was on the fire was not
enough for all. But, especially
on account of the next verse,
we believe Christ's object
was to give the disciples an
occasion of seeing at once the
size and number of the fishes,
that so they might be the
more impressed with the
greatness of the miracle.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>11. Ascendit Simon Petrus,
et traxit rete in terrain, plenum
magnis piscibus centum quinquaginta
tribus. Et cum tanti
essent, non est scissum rete.</cell>
<cell>11. Simon Peter went up,
and drew the net to land, full
of great fishes, one hundred
fifty-three. And although
there were so many, the net
was not broken.</cell></row></table>

<p>
11. <hi rend='bold'>Simon Peter went up.</hi>
Peter went <emph>aboard</emph>, and drew
the net to land. The fact that
the net was not broken is evidently
mentioned as something
extraordinary. If this great
draught was intended, as
doubtless it was (see Matthew
iv. 19; Luke v. 10: <q>From
henceforth thou shalt catch
men</q>), to symbolize the success
which was to attend the
labours of the Apostles in
drawing men into the Church,
we may note how fitting it
was that Peter led the way in
going to fish (verse 3), and
landed the net, and brought
the fish to his Master on this
occasion. For it was he who
first preached to the Jews
on the day of Pentecost, converting
about three thousand
(Acts ii. 14-41), and he, too,
who opened the Church to the
Gentiles (Acts x. 1-48).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>12. Dicit eis Iesus: Venite,
prendete. Et nemo audebat
discumbentium interrogare
eum: Tu quis es? scientes
quia Dominus est.</cell>
<cell>12. Jesus saith to them:
Come, and dine. And none of
them who were at meat, durst
ask him: Who art thou?
knowing that it was the Lord.</cell></row></table>

<p>
12. <hi rend='bold'>Come, and dine</hi> (ἀριστήσατε).
The <emph>primary</emph> meaning of
the Greek word used, has reference
to breakfast, and since it
was early morning (verse 4),
that is the meaning here.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And none of them that
were at meat durst ask him.</hi>
The best supported Greek
reading has: <q>And none <emph>of
the disciples</emph> durst ask him.</q>
The words that follow in this
verse seem to imply that
Christ's appearance on this
occasion was not that which
was familiar to the disciples;
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>
yet that because of the miracles
they were convinced that it
was He. Some, as Kuinoel,
think that ἐτόλμα (durst) is
redundant.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>13. Et venit Iesus, et accipit
panem, et dat eis, et piscem
similiter.</cell>
<cell>13. And Jesus cometh and
taketh bread, and giveth them,
and fish in like manner.</cell></row></table>

<p>
13. Their risen Master is
not merely their host, but He
condescends also to be their
servant. Whether He Himself
ate with them, as on
another occasion (Luke xxiv.
43), we are not told.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>And taketh bread</hi> (τὸν ἄρτον).
The article points back to the
bread mentioned in verse 9,
which Christ Himself had
provided. So, too, in the case
of the fish (τὸ ὀψάριον).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>14. Hoc iam tertio manifestatus
est Iesus discipulis suis,
cum resurrexisset a mortuis.</cell>
<cell>14. This is now the third
time that Jesus was manifested
to his disciples, after he was
risen from the dead.</cell></row></table>

<p>
14. <hi rend='bold'>This is now the third
time</hi>, &amp;c. It was not His
third appearance absolutely,
for our Evangelist himself has
already recorded three before
this: that to Magdalen (xx. 14-18),
that to the ten Apostles
on Easter Sunday (xx. 19-23),
and that to the eleven on
Low Sunday (xx. 26). The
meaning, then, appears to be,
that this was the third
appearance to any <emph>considerable
number</emph> of the disciples.
</p>

<p>
Some, as Patrizzi, suppose this
appearance at the sea of Galilee
to have been absolutely the
seventh, after the resurrection,
mentioned in the Gospels.
Others make it the eighth, and
suppose the one upon the mountain
of Galilee (Matt. xxviii.
16) to have been the seventh.
We rather incline to the view
that it was the seventh; and,
perhaps, at this seventh appearance
Jesus named to the
Apostles the mountain on
which His eighth appearance
would take place (Matt. xxviii.
16). For the other appearances
of the Lord during the forty
days of His risen life, see Mark
xvi. 14-20; Acts i. 4-9; 1 Cor.
xv. 5-7.
</p>

<anchor id='XXI_15'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>15. Cum ergo prandissent,
dicit Simoni Petro Iesus: Simon
Ioannis, diligis me plus his?
Dicit ei: Etiam Domine, tu
scis quia amote. Dicit ei:
Pasce agnos meos.</cell>
<cell>15. When therefore they
had dined, Jesus saith to
Simon Peter: Simon <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of
John, lovest thou me more
than these? He saith to him:
Yea, Lord, thou knowest that
I love thee. He saith to him:
Feed my lambs.</cell></row></table>

<p>
15. <hi rend='bold'>When, therefore.</hi> When
they had breakfasted, and
were, therefore, free from distractions,
so that they could
attend to what was said, Jesus
addressed Peter.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Simon, son of John</hi> (see
above on <ref target='I_42'>i. 42</ref>). It was certainly
not without a reason
that Jesus here addressed Peter
by his former name of Simon.
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
Though the Apostle's name
had been already changed into
Peter (Mark iii. 10), still he
had not yet begun to be what
that new name indicated, the
<emph>rock</emph> or foundation of the
Church, its Pope and supreme
head on earth. Our Lord was
now about to confer that dignity
upon him, and the mention of
his former name, now that he
was accustomed to the name
of Peter, was calculated to remind
him of the change of
name, and still more of the
<emph>promised</emph> authority and pre-eminence
(Matt. xvi. 17, 19),
which that change implied.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>More than these.</hi> It is supremely
ridiculous to suppose,
as some Protestants have done,
that Christ merely meant to
ask, if Peter loved Him more
than he loved <emph>these fish</emph>. Surely
that would be but a poor
proof of his love for his Master!
It is equally improbable,
though not quite so absurd, to
suppose that Christ meant:
Lovest thou Me more than
thou lovest these companions
of thine? For Peter knew and
believed Jesus to be God (Matt.
xvi. 16), had declared before
now his readiness to die with
Him (Luke xxii. 33), and on
this very morning had proved
the intensity of his love for his
Master by leaping from the
boat and quitting the Apostles
to come to Him. Surely,
then, it is wholly improbable
that Christ merely meant to
ask if Peter loved Him more
than he loved his fellow-Apostles.
</p>

<p>
The meaning, then, plainly
is: lovest thou Me more than
these love Me? Peter replies,
humbly avoiding any comparison
between his own love and
that of his companions, and
appealing to Jesus, whom he
knew to be the Searcher of
Hearts, in confirmation of the
love that he avows: <hi rend='bold'>Yea,
Lord, thou knowest that I
love thee</hi>. It is worthy of
note that the word which Peter
uses to express his love, is not
that which Christ had just used
in His question. Christ had
asked: Lovest thou (ἀγαπᾷς)
Me? Peter replies: Yea,
Lord, Thou knowest that I
love (φιλῶ) Thee. Many
commentators think the distinction
is not to be pressed,
but we cannot believe that
Peter changed the word without
a reason, especially as he
does so again in his second
reply (verse 16), and Christ, in
His third question, adopts the
word that Peter insists upon
using. Whatever the distinction
be, it is lost in our
English version; but the
reader will see that an effort is
made to preserve it in the
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
Vulgate, which in each case
renders ἀγαπάω, by <q>diligo,</q>
and φιλέω by <q>amo.</q> We
think that Trench properly
appreciates the difference between
the two words. <q>On
occasion,</q> he says, <q>of that
threefold Lovest thou Me,</q>
which the risen Lord addresses
to Peter, He asks him first,
ἀγαπᾷ με. At that moment,
when all the pulses in the
heart of the now penitent
Apostle are beating with an
earnest affection towards his
Lord, this word on that Lord's
lips sounds too cold; not sufficiently
expressing the warmth
of his personal affection toward
Him. Besides the question
itself, which grieves and hurts
Peter (verse 17), there is an
additional pang in the form
which the question takes,
sounding as though it were intended
to put him at a comparative
distance from his
Lord, and to keep him there;
or at least as not permitting
him to approach so near to
Him as he fain would. He,
therefore, in his answer substitutes
for it the word of a
more <emph>personal</emph> love, φιλῶ σε
(verse 15). When Christ repeats
the question in the same
words as at the first, Peter in
his reply again substitutes his
φιλῶ for the ἀγαπᾷς of his
Lord (verse 16). And now at
length he has conquered; for
when for the third time his
Master puts the question to
him, He does it with the word
which Peter feels will alone express
all that is in his heart,
and instead of the twice-repeated
ἀγαπαᾷς, His word is
φιλεῖς, now (verse 17). (Trench,
<hi rend='italic'>Syn. of the New Testament</hi>, pp.
48, 49).<note place='foot'>So, too, Hesych. and Lidd. and Scott take φιλέω as stronger than
ἀγαπᾷω, so that the two words correspond to <q>amare</q> and <q>diligere</q> respectively,
as the Vulgate makes them. The distinction between the two Latin
words is well recognised. Thus Cicero (Ep. Fam. xiii. 47), writing to one
friend about another says: <q>Ut scires illum a me non <emph>diligi</emph> solum verum
etiam <emph>amari</emph>.</q></note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>16. Dicit ei iterum: Simon
Ioannis, diligis me? Ait illi:
Etiam, Domine, tu scis quia
amo te. Dicit ei: Pasce agnos
meos.</cell>
<cell>16. He saith to him again:
Simon <hi rend='italic'>son</hi> of John, lovest thou
me? He saith to him: Yea
Lord, thou knowest that I love
thee. He saith to him: Feed
my lambs.</cell></row></table>

<p>
16. In the second question
our Lord drops the comparison
between Peter's love and that of
the other Apostles, and, according
to the Greek text, uses different
words in giving Peter his
commission. Before, it was:
<emph>Feed</emph> My <emph>lambs</emph> (Βόσκε τὰ ἀρνία
μου): now it is: <emph>Tend</emph> (or rule)
My <emph>sheep</emph> (ποίμανε τὰ πρόβατά
μου). Among Uncial MSS., B
and C read προβάτια (little sheep)
here. But A, D, X, and nearly
<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>
all others read πρόβατά; and
while the Vulg. (agnos) favours
the former, the Vetus Itala
(oves) supports the latter. It
is difficult, then, to decide between
the two readings.
</p>

<p>
Whether Christ intended to
signify one portion of His
Church by the lambs, the remaining
portion by the sheep,
or merely used two different
terms to indicate, in each case,
<emph>the whole flock</emph>, matters little as
to the sense of the passage; for
in either case the whole flock of
Christ is committed to Peter's
care.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>17. Dicit ei tertio: Simon
Ioannis, amas me? Contristatus
est Petrus, quia dixit ei
tertio, Amas me? et dixit ei:
Domine, tu omnia nosti: tu
scis quia amo te. Dixit ei:
Pasce oves meas.</cell>
<cell>17. He said to him the
third time: Simon son of
John, lovest thou me? Peter
was grieved, because he had
said to him the third time,
Lovest thou me? And he
said to him: Lord, thou
knowest all things: thou knowest
that I love thee. He said
to him: Feed my sheep.</cell></row></table>

<p>
17. Again, a third time, Jesus
puts the question, but now
changing His word to the
stronger word of Peter's choice.
This threefold repetition of the
question, provoking the threefold
confession of Peter's love,
was probably intended, not
only to make amends for Peter's
threefold denial, but also to indicate
the solemn importance
of the trust that was now committed
to him. Peter was
grieved at the repetition of the
question, because it seemed as
if his Lord suspected the sincerity
of his love, or, perhaps,
he feared that the repeated
questioning foreboded another
fall.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>He said to him: Feed my
sheep.</hi> Here, too, as in the
preceding verse it is doubtful
whether <q>little sheep</q> or
<q>sheep</q> is the true reading.
In favour of the former we
have here not only B and C but
also A. On the other hand, the
Vulgate in this verse (oves)
supports the latter. The diminutive,
as a term of endearment,
would not be out of place
in this verse or the preceding.
</p>

<p>
The Vatican Council has interpreted
this passage, verses
15-17, of the bestowal of the
primacy on Peter&mdash;a primacy
not merely of honour, but also
of jurisdiction&mdash;so that no
Catholic is free to interpret the
passage in any sense other than
this. <q>Docemus itaque et
declaramus, Juxta Evangelii
testimonia primatum <emph>jurisdictionis</emph>
in <emph>universam</emph> Dei
Ecclesiam <emph>immediate</emph> et directe
beato Petro Apostolo promissum
atque collatum a Christo
Domino fuisse.... Atque uni
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
Simoni Petro contulit Jesus
post suam resurrectionem
summi pastoris et rectoris jurisdictionem
in totum suum ovile,
dicendo: Pasce agnos meos:
Pasce oves meas</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Decr.
Vat.</hi>, cap. 1, <hi rend='italic'>De Apost. Prim.
Instit.</hi>) And, indeed, the passage
cannot reasonably be interpreted
in any other sense. For
Peter alone is addressed, and
his love for his master singled
out for comparison with that of
his companions, to show that
to him individually, and not to
them with him, the commission
here given was entrusted.
</p>

<p>
What that commission was
the Vatican Council tells us in
the passage already quoted,
and the words of Christ prove.
Peter was appointed to feed the
<emph>whole flock</emph> of Christ, to rule it
as a shepherd rules his sheep.
Now, the shepherd not merely
feeds his sheep, but he directs
and controls them, tends them,
guards them from harm (see
above on <ref target='X_1'>x. 1</ref>), and in various
other ways promotes their good.
<q>Wherefore the primacy conferred
upon Peter in this metaphor
is an <emph>ordinary</emph><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, belonging to him in virtue of his office.</note>, <emph>immediate</emph><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, extending <emph>directly</emph> over all the faithful, and not merely mediately
through their several bishops. (See Franz., <hi rend='italic'>De. Eccl. Thes.</hi>, x. iii. 2 c.)</note>,
<emph>universal</emph>, <emph>supreme</emph>, power to
<emph>teach</emph> men the doctrine of Christ,
to furnish them with the <emph>pastures</emph>
of salvation, through the
Sacraments, evangelical counsels,
&amp;c.; to <emph>make laws</emph> by
which the sheep may be directed
to the eternal pastures; to <emph>appoint
subordinate pastors</emph>; to
<emph>secure that the laws be observed</emph>;
to <emph>punish</emph> disobedient sheep,
and to <emph>bring back erring sheep</emph>
to the fold. It is, therefore, the
fullest power of <emph>Episcopal jurisdiction</emph>.
Wherefore St. Peter
himself (1 Peter ii. 25) calls
Christ <q>the <emph>shepherd</emph> and bishop
of souls</q></q> (Corl.).
</p>

<p>
This wonderful power, then,
which as visible head of the
Church, and in behalf of its
invisible Head Jesus Christ,
Peter was to exercise through
himself and his successors
over all the flock of Christ,
whether bishops, priests, or
people, was given to him on
the shore of the sea of Galilee,
on the present occasion.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>18. Amen, amen dico tibi:
cum esses iunior, cingebas te,
et ambulabas ubi volebas:
cum autem senueris, extendes
manus tuas, et alius te cinget,
et ducet quo tu non vis.</cell>
<cell>18. Amen, amen, I say to
thee: when thou wast younger,
thou didst gird thyself, and
didst walk where thou wouldst.
But when thou shalt be old,
thou shalt stretch forth thy
hands, and another shall gird
thee, and lead thee whither
thou wouldst not.</cell></row></table>

<p>
18. We are told by St. John
in the following verse that, in
the words recorded in this,
Christ signified by <emph>what kind</emph>
(ποὶῳ) of death Peter should
glorify God. Why the Lord
chose this particular time,
immediately after he had appointed
Peter supreme head
of the Church, to foretell for
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
the Apostle a martyr's death
by crucifixion, we cannot say
with certainty. Probably it
was to console Peter, now
grieved by the thrice-repeated
question, and to assure him
that, though he had denied his
Lord and had just now been
closely questioned as to his
love, yet his final perseverance
was secure.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>When thou wast younger</hi>,
opposed here to: <q>When
thou shalt be old,</q> probably
includes Peter's life up to the
time to which the prediction
refers. It is as if Christ had
said: Whilst thou <emph>art</emph> young;
for as Kuinoel on this verse
says: <q>Praeterita de re
praesente in oraculis adhibentur.</q>
At all events, Peter
was still young in the sense of
the word here, for we know
from verse 7 that on this very
morning he had girded himself.
<hi rend='bold'>Thou didst gird thyself</hi>, &amp;c.
The meaning is: Throughout
your life, as on this morning
before you swam to Me, you
gird yourself when you will to
do what you will, and go where
you will; but the day shall
come when your hands shall
no longer be free to gird
yourself, but you shall stretch
them forth to have them bound
to the transverse beam of a
cross,<note place='foot'><q>Crux enim solebat ita a cruciariis portari, ut brachia ligno transverso
funibus extensa alligarentur.</q>&mdash;Corl.</note> and another shall gird
you (with a cloth round your
loins), and shall lead you away
to death&mdash;to death, from which
human nature <emph>naturally</emph> recoils.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>19. Hoc autem dixit, significans
qua morte clarificaturus
esset Deum. Et cum hoc dixisset,
dicit ei: Sequere me.</cell>
<cell>19. And this he said, signifying
by what death he should
glorify God. And when he
had said this, he saith to him:
Follow me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
19. <hi rend='bold'>And this he said, signifying
by what death he
should glorify God.</hi> When
St. John wrote this, St. Peter's
death had thrown light on
Christ's words, if, indeed, our
Evangelist did not understand
their meaning at the time they
were spoken. That Peter understood
it, we may rest assured.
According to tradition, Peter,
at his own request, was crucified
with his head downwards,
declining, in his humility, to be
crucified like his Lord.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Follow me.</hi> Most of the
fathers take these words to
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>
mean, not so much that Peter
was now to walk after Jesus,
as that he was to follow Him
through the death of the cross
to the glory of the Father.
Compare xiii. <ref target='XIII_36'>36</ref>, <ref target='XIII_37'>37</ref>.
</p>

<anchor id='XXI_20'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>20. Conversus Petrus vidit
illum discipulum, quem diligebat
Iesus, sequentem, qui et
recubuit in coena super pectus
eius, et dixit: Domine quis est
qui tradet te?</cell>
<cell>20. Peter turning about, saw
that disciple whom Jesus loved
following, who also leaned on
his breast at supper, and said:
Lord, who is he that shall
betray thee?</cell></row></table>

<p>
20. <hi rend='bold'>Peter turning about,
saw that disciple whom
Jesus loved following.</hi> From
these words it would appear that
Christ had begun to move
away and Peter to follow, as if
to symbolize the higher sense
in which Peter was one day to
tread in His footsteps.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Who also leaned.</hi> Rather,
<q>who also leaned back</q> (ἀνέπεσεν).
The reference is to the
incident recorded in <ref target='XIII_25'>xiii. 25</ref>,
not to the position John occupied
at table.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>21. Hunc ergo cum vidisset
Petrus, dixit Iesu: Domine hic
autem quid?</cell>
<cell>21. Him therefore when
Peter had seen, he saith to
Jesus: Lord, and what <hi rend='italic'>shall</hi>
this man <hi rend='italic'>do</hi>?</cell></row></table>

<p>
21. Peter, having learned
what his own end was to be,
was now anxious to know the
end that awaited our Evangelist,
who was so dear to Jesus
and to himself. He therefore
asked: <q>And what shall this man
do?</q> or rather as the
Greek has it; <q>And this man,
what?</q> that is to say, what
end awaits him?
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>22. Dicit ei Iesus: Sic eum
volo manere donec veniam,
quid ad te? tu me sequere.</cell>
<cell>22. Jesus saith to him: So
I will have him to remain till
I come, what is it to thee?
follow thou me.</cell></row></table>

<p>
22. <hi rend='bold'>So I will</hi>, &amp;c. <q>So</q>
translates the Vulgate <q>sic,</q>
which is a misprint for <foreign rend='italic'>si</foreign> (ἐαν).
Hence the true reading is: If I
will have him to remain till I
come, what is it to thee?
Follow <emph>thou</emph> Me. Our Lord
here reproves Peter's curiosity
and bids him see to himself,
nor wish to know more than
his Master was pleased to
communicate.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Follow thou me.</hi> <q>Thou</q> is
emphatic. Peter's question regarding
the end that awaited
John; and our Lord's reply,
contrasting as it does the two
Apostles (<q>If I will have <emph>him</emph></q>
... Follow <emph>thou</emph>), justifies us in
taking the words <q>Follow thou
me</q> in reference to Peter's death
by crucifixion.
</p>

<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>23. Exiit ergo sermo iste inter
fratres quia discipulus ille
non moritur. Et non dixit ei
Iesus: Non moritur: sed: Sic
eum volo manere donec
veniam, quid ad te?</cell>
<cell>23. This saying therefore
went abroad among the
brethren, that that disciple
should not die. And Jesus
did not say to him: He
should not die; but, So I will
have him to remain till I come,
what is it to thee?</cell></row></table>

<p>
23. Our Evangelist tells us
here what was <emph>not</emph> the meaning
of the Lord's words; what
their meaning was, he does not
say. He merely wished to show
that the words afforded no
ground for the belief which prevailed
among the faithful, and
which his own very advanced
age at the time when this Gospel
was written tended to confirm,
that he was not to die at
all, or at least not until the day
of judgment. Those who deny
the authenticity of this last
chapter appeal triumphantly to
this verse. It was written, they
say, after St. John died, when
it become necessary to explain
away the meaning that had
been put upon our Lord's
words. But, from what we have
said already, the reader will
have seen that there is not the
slightest reason why this verse
may not have been written by
St. John himself.
</p>

<p>
There is a difference of
opinion as to what our Lord
meant by the words: <q>If I
will have him to remain till I
come, what is it to thee?</q>
Some have taken the meaning
to be: If I will have him to
remain till I come for him in a
<emph>natural</emph> death, what is it to
thee? But this is not
probable; Christ comes for
the martyr just as much as for
him who dies a natural death.
</p>

<p>
Others thus: If I will have
him to remain till My coming
at the destruction of Jerusalem,
what is it to thee?
</p>

<p>
But it is most likely that
Christ's coming when spoken
of absolutely, as here, refers to
His coming at the day of
judgment. Hence the most
probable view seems to be:
<emph>If I were</emph> to will him to remain
living even till the day of
judgment, what were that to
thee? Thus our Lord makes
a purely hypothetical case, and
conveys no information to
Peter, thereby reproving still
more his curiosity.
</p>

<anchor id='XXI_24'/>
<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm} p{3.5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(30) lw(30)'">
<row><cell>24. Hic est discipulus ille qui
testimonium perhibet de his, et
scripsit haec: et scimus quia
verum est testimonium eius.</cell>
<cell>24. This is that disciple who
giveth testimony of these
things, and hath written these
things: and we know that his
testimony is true.</cell></row>
<row><cell>25. Sunt autem et alia multa
quae fecit Iesus: quae si scribantur
per singula, nec ipsum
arbitror mundum capere posse
eos, qui scribendi sunt, libros.</cell>
<cell>25. But there are also many
other things which Jesus did:
which if they were written
every one, the world itself, I
think, would not be able to
contain the books that should
be written.</cell></row></table>

<p>
24, 25. The authenticity of
these verses has been questioned
more than that of the rest
of the chapter, both because
it is not in St. John's manner
to speak of himself in the
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>
plural number (as here in verse
24: <q><emph>we</emph> know</q>), and because
of the hyperbole in verse 25.
For these reasons, some
Catholic writers have denied
their authenticity, though no
Catholic, as far as we are
aware, has denied their <emph>inspiration</emph>.
Those Catholics who
deny their authenticity, hold
that they were probably written
by the bishops of Asia Minor,
at whose request St. John
wrote the Gospel. See <ref target='Intro_III'>Introd.
iii.</ref>, note. This view is not
without some probability.
Still, we prefer the common
opinion of Catholic commentators,
that the verses were
written by St. John himself;
for without them the conclusion
of the Gospel would be
extremely abrupt.
</p>

<p>
As to the reasons for the
opposite view, though we admit
that St. John does not
usually employ the first person
plural, still it is not
unnatural that in closing his
Gospel he should wish to confirm
his own testimony by an
appeal to the consenting voice
of his contemporaries. Besides,
he does use the same form of
expression in i. 14: <q>And we
saw his glory.</q> See also 1
Ep. i. 3. As to the argument
drawn from the alleged extravagance
of the hyperbole in
verse 25, it has no weight.
For, there is no reason why
St. John may not have used
this striking hyperbole to signify
the inexhaustible treasury
of instruction contained in our
Divine Lord's life and works,
and to suggest the deep truth
that a full account (<q>every
one</q>) of Christ's human life
would be practically infinite.
<q>Hunc loquendi modum,</q> says
St. Aug. on this passage,
<q>Graeco nomine hyperbolem
vocant: qui modus, sicut hoc
loco, ita in nonnullis aliis divinis
Literis invenitur ... et
multa hujusmodi, sicut <emph>alii
tropi</emph>, Scripturis S. non desunt.</q>
</p>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
